BRUTUS. Such an exploit have I in hand, Ligarius,
    Had you a healthful ear to hear of it.
  LIGARIUS. By all the gods that Romans bow before,
    I here discard my sickness! Soul of Rome!
    Brave son, derived from honorable loins!
    Thou, like an exorcist, hast conjured up
    My mortified spirit. Now bid me run,
    And I will strive with things impossible,
    Yea, get the better of them. What's to do?
  BRUTUS. A piece of work that will make sick men whole.
  LIGARIUS. But are not some whole that we must make sick?
  BRUTUS. That must we also. What it is, my Caius,
    I shall unfold to thee, as we are going
    To whom it must be done.
  LIGARIUS. Set on your foot,
    And with a heart new-fired I follow you,
    To do I know not what; but it sufficeth
    That Brutus leads me on.
  BRUTUS. Follow me then.                                Exeunt.




SCENE II.
Caesar's house. Thunder and lightning.

Enter Caesar, in his nightgown.

  CAESAR. Nor heaven nor earth have been at peace tonight.
    Thrice hath Calpurnia in her sleep cried out,
    "Help, ho! They murther Caesar!" Who's within?

                         Enter a Servant.

  SERVANT. My lord?
  CAESAR. Go bid the priests do present sacrifice,
    And bring me their opinions of success.
  SERVANT. I will, my lord.                                Exit.

                         Enter Calpurnia.

  CALPURNIA. What mean you, Caesar? Think you to walk forth?
    You shall not stir out of your house today.
  CAESAR. Caesar shall forth: the things that threaten'd me
    Ne'er look'd but on my back; when they shall see
    The face of Caesar, they are vanished.
  CALPURNIA. Caesar, I I stood on ceremonies,
    Yet now they fright me. There is one within,
    Besides the things that we have heard and seen,
    Recounts most horrid sights seen by the watch.
    A lioness hath whelped in the streets;
    And graves have yawn'd, and yielded up their dead;
    Fierce fiery warriors fight upon the clouds,
    In ranks and squadrons and right form of war,
    Which drizzled blood upon the Capitol;
    The noise of battle hurtled in the air,
    Horses did neigh and dying men did groan,
    And ghosts did shriek and squeal about the streets.
    O Caesar! These things are beyond all use,
    And I do fear them.
  CAESAR. What can be avoided
    Whose end is purposed by the mighty gods?
    Yet Caesar shall go forth, for these predictions
    Are to the world in general as to Caesar.
  CALPURNIA. When beggars die, there are no comets seen;
    The heavens themselves blaze forth the death of princes.
  CAESAR. Cowards die many times before their deaths;
    The valiant never taste of death but once.
    Of all the wonders that I yet have heard,
    It seems to me most strange that men should fear
    Seeing that death, a necessary end,
    Will come when it will come.

                      Re-enter Servant.

    What say the augurers?
  SERVANT. They would not have you to stir forth today.
    Plucking the entrails of an offering forth,
    They could not find a heart within the beast.
  CAESAR. The gods do this in shame of cowardice.
    Caesar should be a beast without a heart
    If he should stay at home today for fear.
    No, Caesar shall not. Danger knows full well
    That Caesar is more dangerous than he.
    We are two lions litter'd in one day,
    And I the elder and more terrible.
    And Caesar shall go forth.
  CALPURNIA. Alas, my lord,
    Your wisdom is consumed in confidence.
    Do not go forth today. Call it my fear
    That keeps you in the house and not your own.
    We'll send Mark Antony to the Senate House,
    And he shall say you are not well today.
    Let me, upon my knee, prevail in this.
  CAESAR. Mark Antony shall say I am not well,
    And, for thy humor, I will stay at home.

                        Enter Decius.

    Here's Decius Brutus, he shall tell them so.
  DECIUS. Caesar, all hail! Good morrow, worthy Caesar!
    I come to fetch you to the Senate House.
  CAESAR. And you are come in very happy time
    To bear my greeting to the senators
    And tell them that I will not come today.
    Cannot, is false, and that I dare not, falser:
    I will not come today. Tell them so, Decius.
  CALPURNIA. Say he is sick.
  CAESAR. Shall Caesar send a lie?
    Have I in conquest stretch'd mine arm so far
    To be afeard to tell greybeards the truth?
    Decius, go tell them Caesar will not come.
  DECIUS. Most mighty Caesar, let me know some cause,
    Lest I be laugh'd at when I tell them so.
  CAESAR. The cause is in my will: I will not come,
    That is enough to satisfy the Senate.
    But, for your private satisfaction,
    Because I love you, I will let you know.
    Calpurnia here, my wife, stays me at home;
    She dreamt tonight she saw my statue,
    Which, like a fountain with an hundred spouts,
    Did run pure blood, and many lusty Romans
    Came smiling and did bathe their hands in it.
    And these does she apply for warnings and portents
    And evils imminent, and on her knee
    Hath begg'd that I will stay at home today.
  DECIUS. This dream is all amiss interpreted;
    It was a vision fair and fortunate.
    Your statue spouting blood in many pipes,
    In which so many smiling Romans bathed,
    Signifies that from you great Rome shall suck
    Reviving blood, and that great men shall press
    For tinctures, stains, relics, and cognizance.
    This by Calpurnia's dream is signified.
  CAESAR. And this way have you well expounded it.
  DECIUS. I have, when you have heard what I can say.
    And know it now, the Senate have concluded
    To give this day a crown to mighty Caesar.
    If you shall send them word you will not come,
    Their minds may change. Besides, it were a mock
    Apt to be render'd, for someone to say
    "Break up the Senate till another time,
    When Caesar's wife shall meet with better dreams."
    If Caesar hide himself, shall they not whisper
    "Lo, Caesar is afraid"?
    Pardon me, Caesar, for my dear dear love
    To your proceeding bids me tell you this,
    And reason to my love is liable.
  CAESAR. How foolish do your fears seem now, Calpurnia!
    I am ashamed I did yield to them.
    Give me my robe, for I will go.

         Enter Publius, Brutus, Ligarius, Metellus, Casca,
                     Trebonius, and Cinna.

    And look where Publius is come to fetch me.
  PUBLIUS. Good morrow,Caesar.
  CAESAR. Welcome, Publius.
    What, Brutus, are you stirr'd so early too?
    Good morrow, Casca. Caius Ligarius,
    Caesar was ne'er so much your enemy
    As that same ague which hath made you lean.
    What is't o'clock?
  BRUTUS. Caesar, 'tis strucken eight.
  CAESAR. I thank you for your pains and courtesy.

                           Enter Antony.

    See, Antony, that revels long o' nights,
    Is notwithstanding up. Good morrow, Antony.
  ANTONY. So to most noble Caesar.
  CAESAR. Bid them prepare within.
    I am to blame to be thus waited for.
    Now, Cinna; now, Metellus; what, Trebonius,
    I have an hour's talk in store for you;
    Remember that you call on me today;
    Be near me, that I may remember you.
  TREBONIUS. Caesar, I will. [Aside.] And so near will I be
    That your best friends shall wish I had been further.
  CAESAR. Good friends, go in and taste some wine with me,
    And we like friends will straightway go together.
  BRUTUS. [Aside.] That every like is not the same, O Caesar,
    The heart of Brutus yearns to think upon!            Exeunt.




SCENE III.
A street near the Capitol.

Enter Artemidorus, reading paper.

  ARTEMIDORUS. "Caesar, beware of Brutus; take heed of Cassius; come
    not near Casca; have an eye to Cinna; trust not Trebonius; mark
    well Metellus Cimber; Decius Brutus loves thee not; thou hast
    wronged Caius Ligarius. There is but one mind in all these men,
    and it is bent against Caesar. If thou beest not immortal, look
    about you. Security gives way to conspiracy. The mighty gods
    defend thee!
                                        Thy lover, Artemidorus."
    Here will I stand till Caesar pass along,
    And as a suitor will I give him this.
    My heart laments that virtue cannot live
    Out of the teeth of emulation.
    If thou read this, O Caesar, thou mayest live;
    If not, the Fates with traitors do contrive.           Exit.




SCENE IV.
Another part of the same street, before the house of Brutus.

Enter Portia and Lucius.

  PORTIA. I prithee, boy, run to the Senate House;
    Stay not to answer me, but get thee gone.
    Why dost thou stay?
  LUCIUS. To know my errand, madam.
  PORTIA. I would have had thee there, and here again,
    Ere I can tell thee what thou shouldst do there.
    O constancy, be strong upon my side!
    Set a huge mountain 'tween my heart and tongue!
    I have a man's mind, but a woman's might.
    How hard it is for women to keep counsel!
    Art thou here yet?
  LUCIUS. Madam, what should I do?
    Run to the Capitol, and nothing else?
    And so return to you, and nothing else?
  PORTIA. Yes, bring me word, boy, if thy lord look well,
    For he went sickly forth; and take good note
    What Caesar doth, what suitors press to him.
    Hark, boy, what noise is that?
  LUCIUS. I hear none, madam.
  PORTIA. Prithee, listen well.
    I heard a bustling rumor like a fray,
    And the wind brings it from the Capitol.
  LUCIUS. Sooth, madam, I hear nothing.

                     Enter the Soothsayer.

  PORTIA. Come hither, fellow;
    Which way hast thou been?
  SOOTHSAYER. At mine own house, good lady.
  PORTIA. What is't o'clock?
  SOOTHSAYER. About the ninth hour, lady.
  PORTIA. Is Caesar yet gone to the Capitol?
  SOOTHSAYER. Madam, not yet. I go to take my stand
    To see him pass on to the Capitol.
  PORTIA. Thou hast some suit to Caesar, hast thou not?
  SOOTHSAYER. That I have, lady. If it will please Caesar
    To be so good to Caesar as to hear me,
    I shall beseech him to befriend himself.
  PORTIA. Why, know'st thou any harm's intended towards him?
  SOOTHSAYER. None that I know will be, much that I fear may chance.
    Good morrow to you. Here the street is narrow,
    The throng that follows Caesar at the heels,
    Of senators, of praetors, common suitors,
    Will crowd a feeble man almost to death.
    I'll get me to a place more void and there
    Speak to great Caesar as he comes along.               Exit.
  PORTIA. I must go in. Ay me, how weak a thing
    The heart of woman is! O Brutus,
    The heavens speed thee in thine enterprise!
    Sure, the boy heard me. Brutus hath a suit
    That Caesar will not grant. O, I grow faint.
    Run, Lucius, and commend me to my lord;
    Say I am merry. Come to me again,
    And bring me word what he doth say to thee.
                                               Exeunt severally.




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT III. SCENE I.
Rome. Before the Capitol; the Senate sitting above.
A crowd of people, among them Artemidorus and the Soothsayer.

Flourish. Enter Caesar, Brutus, Cassius, Casca, Decius, Metellus,
Trebonius, Cinna, Antony, Lepidus, Popilius, Publius, and others.

  CAESAR. The ides of March are come.
  SOOTHSAYER. Ay, Caesar, but not gone.
  A Hail, Caesar! Read this schedule.
  DECIUS. Trebonius doth desire you to o'er read,
    At your best leisure, this his humble suit.
  ARTEMIDORUS. O Caesar, read mine first, for mine's a suit
    That touches Caesar nearer. Read it, great Caesar.
  CAESAR. What touches us ourself shall be last served.
  ARTEMIDORUS. Delay not, Caesar; read it instantly.
  CAESAR. What, is the fellow mad?
  PUBLIUS. Sirrah, give place.
  CASSIUS. What, urge you your petitions in the street?
    Come to the Capitol.

      Caesar goes up to the Senate House, the rest follow.

  POPILIUS. I wish your enterprise today may thrive.
  CASSIUS. What enterprise, Popilius?
  POPILIUS. Fare you well.
                                             Advances to Caesar.
  BRUTUS. What said Popilius Lena?
  CASSIUS. He wish'd today our enterprise might thrive.
    I fear our purpose is discovered.
  BRUTUS. Look, how he makes to Caesar. Mark him.
  CASSIUS. Casca,
    Be sudden, for we fear prevention.
    Brutus, what shall be done? If this be known,
    Cassius or Caesar never shall turn back,
    For I will slay myself.
  BRUTUS. Cassius, be constant.
    Popilius Lena speaks not of our purposes;
    For, look, he smiles, and Caesar doth not change.
  CASSIUS. Trebonius knows his time, for, look you, Brutus,
    He draws Mark Antony out of the way.
                                    Exeunt Antony and Trebonius.
  DECIUS. Where is Metellus Cimber? Let him
    And presently prefer his suit to Caesar.
  BRUTUS. He is address'd; press near and second him.
  CINNA. Casca, you are the first that rears your hand.
  CAESAR. Are we all ready? What is now amiss
    That Caesar and his Senate must redress?
  METELLUS. Most high, most mighty, and most puissant Caesar,
    Metellus Cimber throws before thy seat
    An humble heart.                                     Kneels.
  CAESAR. I must prevent thee, Cimber.
    These couchings and these lowly courtesies
    Might fire the blood of ordinary men
    And turn preordinance and first decree
    Into the law of children. Be not fond
    To think that Caesar bears such rebel blood
    That will be thaw'd from the true quality
    With that which melteth fools- I mean sweet words,
    Low-crooked court'sies, and base spaniel-fawning.
    Thy brother by decree is banished.
    If thou dost bend and pray and fawn for him,
    I spurn thee like a cur out of my way.
    Know, Caesar doth not wrong, nor without cause
    Will he be satisfied.
  METELLUS. Is there no voice more worthy than my own,
    To sound more sweetly in great Caesar's ear
    For the repealing of my banish'd brother?
  BRUTUS. I kiss thy hand, but not in flattery, Caesar,
    Desiring thee that Publius Cimber may
    Have an immediate freedom of repeal.
  CAESAR. What, Brutus?
  CASSIUS. Pardon, Caesar! Caesar, pardon!
    As low as to thy foot doth Cassius fall
    To beg enfranchisement for Publius Cimber.
  CAESAR. I could be well moved, if I were as you;
    If I could pray to move, prayers would move me;
    But I am constant as the northern star,
    Of whose true-fix'd and resting quality
    There is no fellow in the firmament.
    The skies are painted with unnumber'd sparks;
    They are all fire and every one doth shine;
    But there's but one in all doth hold his place.
    So in the world, 'tis furnish'd well with men,
    And men are flesh and blood, and apprehensive;
    Yet in the number I do know but one
    That unassailable holds on his rank,
    Unshaked of motion; and that I am he,
    Let me a little show it, even in this;
    That I was constant Cimber should be banish'd,
    And constant do remain to keep him so.
  CINNA. O Caesar-
  CAESAR. Hence! Wilt thou lift up Olympus?
  DECIUS. Great Caesar-
  CAESAR. Doth not Brutus bootless kneel?
  CASCA. Speak, hands, for me!
                        Casca first, then the other Conspirators
                                  and Marcus Brutus stab Caesar.
  CAESAR. Et tu, Brute?- Then fall, Caesar! Dies.
  CINNA. Liberty! Freedom! Tyranny is dead!
    Run hence, proclaim, cry it about the streets.
  CASSIUS. Some to the common pulpits and cry out
    "Liberty, freedom, and enfranchisement!"
  BRUTUS. People and senators, be not affrighted,
    Fly not, stand still; ambition's debt is paid.
  CASCA. Go to the pulpit, Brutus.
  DECIUS. And Cassius too.
  BRUTUS. Where's Publius?
  CINNA. Here, quite confounded with this mutiny.
  METELLUS. Stand fast together, lest some friend of Caesar's
    Should chance-
  BRUTUS. Talk not of standing. Publius, good cheer,
    There is no harm intended to your person,
    Nor to no Roman else. So tell them, Publius.
  CASSIUS. And leave us, Publius, lest that the people
    Rushing on us should do your age some mischief.
  BRUTUS. Do so, and let no man abide this deed
    But we the doers.

                        Re-enter Trebonius.

  CASSIUS. Where is Antony?
  TREBONIUS. Fled to his house amazed.
    Men, wives, and children stare, cry out, and run
    As it were doomsday.
  BRUTUS. Fates, we will know your pleasures.
    That we shall die, we know; 'tis but the time
    And drawing days out that men stand upon.
  CASSIUS. Why, he that cuts off twenty years of life
    Cuts off so many years of fearing death.
  BRUTUS. Grant that, and then is death a benefit;
    So are we Caesar's friends that have abridged
    His time of fearing death. Stoop, Romans, stoop,
    And let us bathe our hands in Caesar's blood
    Up to the elbows, and besmear our swords;
    Then walk we forth, even to the marketplace,
    And waving our red weapons o'er our heads,
    Let's all cry, "Peace, freedom, and liberty!"
  CASSIUS. Stoop then, and wash. How many ages hence
    Shall this our lofty scene be acted over
    In states unborn and accents yet unknown!
  BRUTUS. How many times shall Caesar bleed in sport,
    That now on Pompey's basis lies along
    No worthier than the dust!
  CASSIUS. So oft as that shall be,
    So often shall the knot of us be call'd
    The men that gave their country liberty.
  DECIUS. What, shall we forth?
  CASSIUS. Ay, every man away.
    Brutus shall lead, and we will grace his heels
    With the most boldest and best hearts of Rome.

                        Enter a Servant.

  BRUTUS. Soft, who comes here? A friend of Antony's.
  SERVANT. Thus, Brutus, did my master bid me kneel,
    Thus did Mark Antony bid me fall down,
    And, being prostrate, thus he bade me say:
    Brutus is noble, wise, valiant, and honest;
    Caesar was mighty, bold, royal, and loving.
    Say I love Brutus and I honor him;
    Say I fear'd Caesar, honor'd him, and loved him.
    If Brutus will vouchsafe that Antony
    May safely come to him and be resolved
    How Caesar hath deserved to lie in death,
    Mark Antony shall not love Caesar dead
    So well as Brutus living, but will follow
    The fortunes and affairs of noble Brutus
    Thorough the hazards of this untrod state
    With all true faith. So says my master Antony.
  BRUTUS. Thy master is a wise and valiant Roman;
    I never thought him worse.
    Tell him, so please him come unto this place,
    He shall be satisfied and, by my honor,
    Depart untouch'd.
  SERVANT. I'll fetch him presently.                       Exit.
  BRUTUS. I know that we shall have him well to friend.
  CASSIUS. I wish we may, but yet have I a mind
    That fears him much, and my misgiving still
    Falls shrewdly to the purpose.

                          Re-enter Antony.

  BRUTUS. But here comes Antony. Welcome, Mark Antony.
  ANTONY. O mighty Caesar! Dost thou lie so low?
    Are all thy conquests, glories, triumphs, spoils,
    Shrunk to this little measure? Fare thee well.
    I know not, gentlemen, what you intend,
    Who else must be let blood, who else is rank.
    If I myself, there is no hour so fit
    As Caesar's death's hour, nor no instrument
    Of half that worth as those your swords, made rich
    With the most noble blood of all this world.
    I do beseech ye, if you bear me hard,
    Now, whilst your purpled hands do reek and smoke,
    Fulfill your pleasure. Live a thousand years,
    I shall not find myself so apt to die;
    No place will please me so, no means of death,
    As here by Caesar, and by you cut off,
    The choice and master spirits of this age.
  BRUTUS. O Antony, beg not your death of us!
    Though now we must appear bloody and cruel,
    As, by our hands and this our present act
    You see we do, yet see you but our hands
    And this the bleeding business they have done.
    Our hearts you see not; they are pitiful;
    And pity to the general wrong of Rome-
    As fire drives out fire, so pity pity-
    Hath done this deed on Caesar. For your part,
    To you our swords have leaden points, Mark Antony;
    Our arms in strength of malice, and our hearts
    Of brothers' temper, do receive you in
    With all kind love, good thoughts, and reverence.
  CASSIUS. Your voice shall be as strong as any man's
    In the disposing of new dignities.
  BRUTUS. Only be patient till we have appeased
    The multitude, beside themselves with fear,
    And then we will deliver you the cause
    Why I, that did love Caesar when I struck him,
    Have thus proceeded.
  ANTONY. I doubt not of your wisdom.
    Let each man render me his bloody hand.
    First, Marcus Brutus, will I shake with you;
    Next, Caius Cassius, do I take your hand;
    Now, Decius Brutus, yours; now yours, Metellus;
    Yours, Cinna; and, my valiant Casca, yours;
    Though last, not least in love, yours, good Trebonius.
    Gentlemen all- alas, what shall I say?
    My credit now stands on such slippery ground,
    That one of two bad ways you must conceit me,
    Either a coward or a flatterer.
    That I did love thee, Caesar, O, 'tis true!
    If then thy spirit look upon us now,
    Shall it not grieve thee dearer than thy death
    To see thy Antony making his peace,
    Shaking the bloody fingers of thy foes,
    Most noble! In the presence of thy corse?
    Had I as many eyes as thou hast wounds,
    Weeping as fast as they stream forth thy blood,
    It would become me better than to close
    In terms of friendship with thine enemies.
    Pardon me, Julius! Here wast thou bay'd, brave hart,
    Here didst thou fall, and here thy hunters stand,
    Sign'd in thy spoil, and crimson'd in thy Lethe.
    O world, thou wast the forest to this hart,
    And this, indeed, O world, the heart of thee.
    How like a deer strucken by many princes
    Dost thou here lie!
  CASSIUS. Mark Antony-
  ANTONY. Pardon me, Caius Cassius.
    The enemies of Caesar shall say this:
    Then, in a friend, it is cold modesty.
  CASSIUS. I blame you not for praising Caesar so;
    But what compact mean you to have with us?
    Will you be prick'd in number of our friends,
    Or shall we on, and not depend on you?
  ANTONY. Therefore I took your hands, but was indeed
    Sway'd from the point by looking down on Caesar.
    Friends am I with you all and love you all,
    Upon this hope that you shall give me reasons
    Why and wherein Caesar was dangerous.
  BRUTUS. Or else were this a savage spectacle.
    Our reasons are so full of good regard
    That were you, Antony, the son of Caesar,
    You should be satisfied.
  ANTONY. That's all I seek;
    And am moreover suitor that I may
    Produce his body to the marketplace,
    And in the pulpit, as becomes a friend,
    Speak in the order of his funeral.
  BRUTUS. You shall, Mark Antony.
  CASSIUS. Brutus, a word with you.
    [Aside to Brutus.] You know not what you do. Do not consent
    That Antony speak in his funeral.
    Know you how much the people may be moved
    By that which he will utter?
  BRUTUS. By your pardon,
    I will myself into the pulpit first,
    And show the reason of our Caesar's death.
    What Antony shall speak, I will protest
    He speaks by leave and by permission,
    And that we are contented Caesar shall
    Have all true rites and lawful ceremonies.
    It shall advantage more than do us wrong.
  CASSIUS. I know not what may fall; I like it not.
  BRUTUS. Mark Antony, here, take you Caesar's body.
    You shall not in your funeral speech blame us,
    But speak all good you can devise of Caesar,
    And say you do't by our permission,
    Else shall you not have any hand at all
    About his funeral. And you shall speak
    In the same pulpit whereto I am going,
    After my speech is ended.
  ANTONY. Be it so,
    I do desire no more.
  BRUTUS. Prepare the body then, and follow us.
                                          Exeunt all but Antony.
  ANTONY. O, pardon me, thou bleeding piece of earth,
    That I am meek and gentle with these butchers!
    Thou art the ruins of the noblest man
    That ever lived in the tide of times.
    Woe to the hand that shed this costly blood!
    Over thy wounds now do I prophesy
    (Which like dumb mouths do ope their ruby lips
    To beg the voice and utterance of my tongue)
    A curse shall light upon the limbs of men;
    Domestic fury and fierce civil strife
    Shall cumber all the parts of Italy;
    Blood and destruction shall be so in use,
    And dreadful objects so familiar,
    That mothers shall but smile when they behold
    Their infants quarter'd with the hands of war;
    All pity choked with custom of fell deeds,
    And Caesar's spirit ranging for revenge,
    With Ate by his side come hot from hell,
    Shall in these confines with a monarch's voice
    Cry "Havoc!" and let slip the dogs of war,
    That this foul deed shall smell above the earth
    With carrion men, groaning for burial.

                        Enter a Servant.

    You serve Octavius Caesar, do you not?
  SERVANT. I do, Mark Antony.
  ANTONY. Caesar did write for him to come to Rome.
  SERVANT. He did receive his letters, and is coming,
    And bid me say to you by word of mouth-
    O Caesar!                                     Sees the body.
  ANTONY. Thy heart is big; get thee apart and weep.
    Passion, I see, is catching, for mine eyes,
    Seeing those beads of sorrow stand in thine,
    Began to water. Is thy master coming?
  SERVANT. He lies tonight within seven leagues of Rome.
  ANTONY. Post back with speed and tell him what hath chanced.
    Here is a mourning Rome, a dangerous Rome,
    No Rome of safety for Octavius yet;
    Hie hence, and tell him so. Yet stay awhile,
    Thou shalt not back till I have borne this corse
    Into the marketplace. There shall I try,
    In my oration, how the people take
    The cruel issue of these bloody men,
    According to the which thou shalt discourse
    To young Octavius of the state of things.
    Lend me your hand.                Exeunt with Caesar's body.




SCENE II.
The Forum.

Enter Brutus and Cassius, and a throng of Citizens.

  CITIZENS. We will be satisfied! Let us be satisfied!
  BRUTUS. Then follow me and give me audience, friends.
    Cassius, go you into the other street
    And part the numbers.
    Those that will hear me speak, let 'em stay here;
    Those that will follow Cassius, go with him;
    And public reasons shall be rendered
    Of Caesar's death.
  FIRST CITIZEN. I will hear Brutus speak.
  SECOND CITIZEN. I will hear Cassius and compare their reasons,
    When severally we hear them rendered.
                               Exit Cassius, with some Citizens.
                                    Brutus goes into the pulpit.
  THIRD CITIZEN. The noble Brutus is ascended. Silence!
  BRUTUS. Be patient till the last.
    Romans, countrymen, and lovers! Hear me for my cause, and be
    silent, that you may hear. Believe me for mine honor, and have
    respect to mine honor, that you may believe. Censure me in your
    wisdom, and awake your senses, that you may the better judge. If
    there be any in this assembly, any dear friend of Caesar's, to
    him I say that Brutus' love to Caesar was no less than his. If
    then that friend demand why Brutus rose against Caesar, this is
    my answer: Not that I loved Caesar less, but that I loved Rome
    more. Had you rather Caesar were living and die all slaves, than
    that Caesar were dead to live all freemen? As Caesar loved me, I
    weep for him; as he was fortunate, I rejoice at it; as he was
    valiant, I honor him; but as he was ambitious, I slew him. There
    is tears for his love, joy for his fortune, honor for his valor,
    and death for his ambition. Who is here so base that would be a
    bondman? If any, speak, for him have I offended. Who is here so
    rude that would not be a Roman? If any, speak, for him have I
    offended. Who is here so vile that will not love his country? If
    any, speak, for him have I offended. I pause for a reply.
  ALL. None, Brutus, none.
  BRUTUS. Then none have I offended. I have done no more to Caesar
    than you shall do to Brutus. The question of his death is
    enrolled in the Capitol, his glory not extenuated, wherein he was
    worthy, nor his offenses enforced, for which he suffered death.

              Enter Antony and others, with Caesar's body.

    Here comes his body, mourned by Mark Antony, who, though he had
    no hand in his death, shall receive the benefit of his dying, a
    place in the commonwealth, as which of you shall not? With this I
    depart- that, as I slew my best lover for the good of Rome, I
    have the same dagger for myself, when it shall please my country
    to need my death.
  ALL. Live, Brutus, live, live!
  FIRST CITIZEN. Bring him with triumph home unto his house.
  SECOND CITIZEN. Give him a statue with his ancestors.
  THIRD CITIZEN. Let him be Caesar.
  FOURTH CITIZEN. Caesar's better parts
    Shall be crown'd in Brutus.
  FIRST CITIZEN. We'll bring him to his house with shouts and
    clamors.
  BRUTUS. My countrymen-
  SECOND CITIZEN. Peace! Silence! Brutus speaks.
  FIRST CITIZEN. Peace, ho!
  BRUTUS. Good countrymen, let me depart alone,
    And, for my sake, stay here with Antony.
    Do grace to Caesar's corse, and grace his speech
    Tending to Caesar's glories, which Mark Antony,
    By our permission, is allow'd to make.
    I do entreat you, not a man depart,
    Save I alone, till Antony have spoke.                  Exit.
  FIRST CITIZEN. Stay, ho, and let us hear Mark Antony.
  THIRD CITIZEN. Let him go up into the public chair;
    We'll hear him. Noble Antony, go up.
  ANTONY. For Brutus' sake, I am beholding to you.
                                           Goes into the pulpit.
  FOURTH CITIZEN. What does he say of Brutus?
  THIRD CITIZEN. He says, for Brutus' sake,
    He finds himself beholding to us all.
  FOURTH CITIZEN. 'Twere best he speak no harm of Brutus here.
  FIRST CITIZEN. This Caesar was a tyrant.
  THIRD CITIZEN. Nay, that's certain.
    We are blest that Rome is rid of him.
  SECOND CITIZEN. Peace! Let us hear what Antony can say.
  ANTONY. You gentle Romans-
  ALL. Peace, ho! Let us hear him.
  ANTONY. Friends, Romans, countrymen, lend me your ears!
    I come to bury Caesar, not to praise him.
    The evil that men do lives after them,
    The good is oft interred with their bones;
    So let it be with Caesar. The noble Brutus
    Hath told you Caesar was ambitious;
    If it were so, it was a grievous fault,
    And grievously hath Caesar answer'd it.
    Here, under leave of Brutus and the rest-
    For Brutus is an honorable man;
    So are they all, all honorable men-
    Come I to speak in Caesar's funeral.
    He was my friend, faithful and just to me;
    But Brutus says he was ambitious,
    And Brutus is an honorable man.
    He hath brought many captives home to Rome,
    Whose ransoms did the general coffers fill.
    Did this in Caesar seem ambitious?
    When that the poor have cried, Caesar hath wept;
    Ambition should be made of sterner stuff:
    Yet Brutus says he was ambitious,
    And Brutus is an honorable man.
    You all did see that on the Lupercal
    I thrice presented him a kingly crown,
    Which he did thrice refuse. Was this ambition?
    Yet Brutus says he was ambitious,
    And sure he is an honorable man.
    I speak not to disprove what Brutus spoke,
    But here I am to speak what I do know.
    You all did love him once, not without cause;
    What cause withholds you then to mourn for him?
    O judgement, thou art fled to brutish beasts,
    And men have lost their reason. Bear with me;
    My heart is in the coffin there with Caesar,
    And I must pause till it come back to me.
  FIRST CITIZEN. Methinks there is much reason in his sayings.
  SECOND CITIZEN. If thou consider rightly of the matter,
    Caesar has had great wrong.
  THIRD CITIZEN. Has he, masters?
    I fear there will a worse come in his place.
  FOURTH CITIZEN. Mark'd ye his words? He would not take the crown;
    Therefore 'tis certain he was not ambitious.
  FIRST CITIZEN. If it be found so, some will dear abide it.
  SECOND CITIZEN. Poor soul, his eyes are red as fire with weeping.
  THIRD CITIZEN. There's not a nobler man in Rome than Antony.
  FOURTH CITIZEN. Now mark him, he begins again to speak.
  ANTONY. But yesterday the word of Caesar might
    Have stood against the world. Now lies he there,
    And none so poor to do him reverence.
    O masters! If I were disposed to stir
    Your hearts and minds to mutiny and rage,
    I should do Brutus wrong and Cassius wrong,
    Who, you all know, are honorable men.
    I will not do them wrong; I rather choose
    To wrong the dead, to wrong myself and you,
    Than I will wrong such honorable men.
    But here's a parchment with the seal of Caesar;
    I found it in his closet, 'tis his will.
    Let but the commons hear this testament-
    Which, pardon me, I do not mean to read-
    And they would go and kiss dead Caesar's wounds
    And dip their napkins in his sacred blood,
    Yea, beg a hair of him for memory,
    And, dying, mention it within their wills,
    Bequeathing it as a rich legacy
    Unto their issue.
  FOURTH CITIZEN. We'll hear the will. Read it, Mark Antony.
  ALL. The will, the will! We will hear Caesar's will.
  ANTONY. Have patience, gentle friends, I must not read it;
    It is not meet you know how Caesar loved you.
    You are not wood, you are not stones, but men;
    And, being men, hearing the will of Caesar,
    It will inflame you, it will make you mad.
    'Tis good you know not that you are his heirs,
    For if you should, O, what would come of it!
  FOURTH CITIZEN. Read the will; we'll hear it, Antony.
    You shall read us the will, Caesar's will.
  ANTONY. Will you be patient? Will you stay awhile?
    I have o'ershot myself to tell you of it.
    I fear I wrong the honorable men
    Whose daggers have stabb'd Caesar; I do fear it.
  FOURTH CITIZEN. They were traitors. Honorable men!
  ALL. The will! The testament!
  SECOND CITIZEN. They were villains, murtherers. The will!
    Read the will!
  ANTONY. You will compel me then to read the will?
    Then make a ring about the corse of Caesar,
    And let me show you him that made the will.
    Shall I descend? And will you give me leave?
  ALL. Come down.
  SECOND CITIZEN. Descend.
                                  He comes down from the pulpit.
  THIRD CITIZEN. You shall have leave.
  FOURTH CITIZEN. A ring, stand round.
  FIRST CITIZEN. Stand from the hearse, stand from the body.
  SECOND CITIZEN. Room for Antony, most noble Antony.
  ANTONY. Nay, press not so upon me, stand far off.
  ALL. Stand back; room, bear back!
  ANTONY. If you have tears, prepare to shed them now.
    You all do know this mantle. I remember
    The first time ever Caesar put it on;
    'Twas on a summer's evening, in his tent,
    That day he overcame the Nervii.
    Look, in this place ran Cassius' dagger through;
    See what a rent the envious Casca made;
    Through this the well-beloved Brutus stabb'd;
    And as he pluck'd his cursed steel away,
    Mark how the blood of Caesar follow'd it,
    As rushing out of doors, to be resolved
    If Brutus so unkindly knock'd, or no;
    For Brutus, as you know, was Caesar's angel.
    Judge, O you gods, how dearly Caesar loved him!
    This was the most unkindest cut of all;
    For when the noble Caesar saw him stab,
    Ingratitude, more strong than traitors' arms,
    Quite vanquish'd him. Then burst his mighty heart,
    And, in his mantle muffling up his face,
    Even at the base of Pompey's statue,
    Which all the while ran blood, great Caesar fell.
    O, what a fall was there, my countrymen!
    Then I, and you, and all of us fell down,
    Whilst bloody treason flourish'd over us.
    O, now you weep, and I perceive you feel
    The dint of pity. These are gracious drops.
    Kind souls, what weep you when you but behold
    Our Caesar's vesture wounded? Look you here,
    Here is himself, marr'd, as you see, with traitors.
  FIRST CITIZEN. O piteous spectacle!
  SECOND CITIZEN. O noble Caesar!
  THIRD CITIZEN. O woeful day!
  FOURTH CITIZEN. O traitors villains!
  FIRST CITIZEN. O most bloody sight!
  SECOND CITIZEN. We will be revenged.
  ALL. Revenge! About! Seek! Burn! Fire! Kill!
    Slay! Let not a traitor live!
  ANTONY. Stay, countrymen.
  FIRST CITIZEN. Peace there! Hear the noble Antony.
  SECOND CITIZEN. We'll hear him, we'll follow him, we'll die with
    him.
  ANTONY. Good friends, sweet friends, let me not stir you up
    To such a sudden flood of mutiny.
    They that have done this deed are honorable.
    What private griefs they have, alas, I know not,
    That made them do it. They are wise and honorable,
    And will, no doubt, with reasons answer you.
    I come not, friends, to steal away your hearts.
    I am no orator, as Brutus is;
    But, as you know me all, a plain blunt man,
    That love my friend, and that they know full well
    That gave me public leave to speak of him.
    For I have neither wit, nor words, nor worth,
    Action, nor utterance, nor the power of speech,
    To stir men's blood. I only speak right on;
    I tell you that which you yourselves do know;
    Show you sweet Caesar's wounds, poor dumb mouths,
    And bid them speak for me. But were I Brutus,
    And Brutus Antony, there were an Antony
    Would ruffle up your spirits and put a tongue
    In every wound of Caesar that should move
    The stones of Rome to rise and mutiny.
  ALL. We'll mutiny.
  FIRST CITIZEN. We'll burn the house of Brutus.
  THIRD CITIZEN. Away, then! Come, seek the conspirators.
  ANTONY. Yet hear me, countrymen; yet hear me speak.
  ALL. Peace, ho! Hear Antony, most noble Antony!
  ANTONY. Why, friends, you go to do you know not what.
    Wherein hath Caesar thus deserved your loves?
    Alas, you know not; I must tell you then.
    You have forgot the will I told you of.
  ALL. Most true, the will! Let's stay and hear the will.
  ANTONY. Here is the will, and under Caesar's seal.
    To every Roman citizen he gives,
    To every several man, seventy-five drachmas.
  SECOND CITIZEN. Most noble Caesar! We'll revenge his death.
  THIRD CITIZEN. O royal Caesar!
  ANTONY. Hear me with patience.
  ALL. Peace, ho!
  ANTONY. Moreover, he hath left you all his walks,
    His private arbors, and new-planted orchards,
    On this side Tiber; he hath left them you,
    And to your heirs forever- common pleasures,
    To walk abroad and recreate yourselves.
    Here was a Caesar! When comes such another?
  FIRST CITIZEN. Never, never. Come, away, away!
    We'll burn his body in the holy place
    And with the brands fire the traitors' houses.
    Take up the body.
  SECOND CITIZEN. Go fetch fire.
  THIRD CITIZEN. Pluck down benches.
  FOURTH CITIZEN. Pluck down forms, windows, anything.
                                  Exeunt Citizens with the body.
  ANTONY. Now let it work. Mischief, thou art afoot,
    Take thou what course thou wilt.

                        Enter a Servant.

    How now, fellow?
  SERVANT. Sir, Octavius is already come to Rome.
  ANTONY. Where is he?
  SERVANT. He and Lepidus are at Caesar's house.
  ANTONY. And thither will I straight to visit him.
    He comes upon a wish. Fortune is merry,
    And in this mood will give us anything.
  SERVANT. I heard him say Brutus and Cassius
    Are rid like madmen through the gates of Rome.
  ANTONY. Be like they had some notice of the people,
    How I had moved them. Bring me to Octavius.          Exeunt.




SCENE III.
A street.

Enter Cinna the poet.

  CINNA. I dreamt tonight that I did feast with Caesar,
    And things unluckily charge my fantasy.
    I have no will to wander forth of doors,
    Yet something leads me forth.

                        Enter Citizens.

  FIRST CITIZEN. What is your name?
  SECOND CITIZEN. Whither are you going?
  THIRD CITIZEN. Where do you dwell?
  FOURTH CITIZEN. Are you a married man or a bachelor?
  SECOND CITIZEN. Answer every man directly.
  FIRST CITIZEN. Ay, and briefly.
  FOURTH CITIZEN. Ay, and wisely.
  THIRD CITIZEN. Ay, and truly, you were best.
  CINNA. What is my name? Whither am I going? Where do I dwell? Am I
    a married man or a bachelor? Then, to answer every man directly
    and briefly, wisely and truly: wisely I say, I am a bachelor.
  SECOND CITIZEN. That's as much as to say they are fools that marry.
    You'll bear me a bang for that, I fear. Proceed directly.
  CINNA. Directly, I am going to Caesar's funeral.
  FIRST CITIZEN. As a friend or an enemy?
  CINNA. As a friend.
  SECOND CITIZEN. That matter is answered directly.
  FOURTH CITIZEN. For your dwelling, briefly.
  CINNA. Briefly, I dwell by the Capitol.
  THIRD CITIZEN. Your name, sir, truly.
  CINNA. Truly, my name is Cinna.
  FIRST CITIZEN. Tear him to pieces, he's a conspirator.
  CINNA. I am Cinna the poet, I am Cinna the poet.
  FOURTH CITIZEN. Tear him for his bad verses, tear him for his bad
    verses.
  CINNA. I am not Cinna the conspirator.
  FOURTH CITIZEN. It is no matter, his name's Cinna. Pluck but his
    name out of his heart, and turn him going.
  THIRD CITIZEN. Tear him, tear him! Come, brands, ho, firebrands. To
    Brutus', to Cassius'; burn all. Some to Decius' house, and some
    to Casca's, some to Ligarius'. Away, go!             Exeunt.




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT IV. SCENE I.
A house in Rome. Antony, Octavius, and Lepidus, seated at a table.

  ANTONY. These many then shall die, their names are prick'd.
  OCTAVIUS. Your brother too must die; consent you, Lepidus?
  LEPIDUS. I do consent-
  OCTAVIUS. Prick him down, Antony.
  LEPIDUS. Upon condition Publius shall not live,
    Who is your sister's son, Mark Antony.
  ANTONY. He shall not live; look, with a spot I damn him.
    But, Lepidus, go you to Caesar's house,
    Fetch the will hither, and we shall determine
    How to cut off some charge in legacies.
  LEPIDUS. What, shall I find you here?
  OCTAVIUS. Or here, or at the Capitol.            Exit Lepidus.
  ANTONY. This is a slight unmeritable man,
    Meet to be sent on errands. Is it fit,
    The three-fold world divided, he should stand
    One of the three to share it?
  OCTAVIUS. So you thought him,
    And took his voice who should be prick'd to die
    In our black sentence and proscription.
  ANTONY. Octavius, I have seen more days than you,
    And though we lay these honors on this man
    To ease ourselves of divers slanderous loads,
    He shall but bear them as the ass bears gold,
    To groan and sweat under the business,
    Either led or driven, as we point the way;
    And having brought our treasure where we will,
    Then take we down his load and turn him off,
    Like to the empty ass, to shake his ears
    And graze in commons.
  OCTAVIUS. You may do your will,
    But he's a tried and valiant soldier.
  ANTONY. So is my horse, Octavius, and for that
    I do appoint him store of provender.
    It is a creature that I teach to fight,
    To wind, to stop, to run directly on,
    His corporal motion govern'd by my spirit.
    And, in some taste, is Lepidus but so:
    He must be taught, and train'd, and bid go forth;
    A barren-spirited fellow, one that feeds
    On objects, arts, and imitations,
    Which, out of use and staled by other men,
    Begin his fashion. Do not talk of him
    But as a property. And now, Octavius,
    Listen great things. Brutus and Cassius
    Are levying powers; we must straight make head;
    Therefore let our alliance be combined,
    Our best friends made, our means stretch'd;
    And let us presently go sit in council,
    How covert matters may be best disclosed,
    And open perils surest answered.
  OCTAVIUS. Let us do so, for we are at the stake,
    And bay'd about with many enemies;
    And some that smile have in their hearts, I fear,
    Millions of mischiefs.                               Exeunt.




SCENE II.
Camp near Sardis. Before Brutus' tent. Drum.

Enter Brutus, Lucilius, Lucius, and Soldiers; Titinius and Pindarus meet them.

  BRUTUS. Stand, ho!
  LUCILIUS. Give the word, ho, and stand.
  BRUTUS. What now, Lucilius, is Cassius near?
  LUCILIUS. He is at hand, and Pindarus is come
    To do you salutation from his master.
  BRUTUS. He greets me well. Your master, Pindarus,
    In his own change, or by ill officers,
    Hath given me some worthy cause to wish
    Things done undone; but if he be at hand,
    I shall be satisfied.
  PINDARUS. I do not doubt
    But that my noble master will appear
    Such as he is, full of regard and honor.
  BRUTUS. He is not doubted. A word, Lucilius,
    How he received you. Let me be resolved.
  LUCILIUS. With courtesy and with respect enough,
    But not with such familiar instances,
    Nor with such free and friendly conference,
    As he hath used of old.
  BRUTUS. Thou hast described
    A hot friend cooling. Ever note, Lucilius,
    When love begins to sicken and decay
    It useth an enforced ceremony.
    There are no tricks in plain and simple faith;
    But hollow men, like horses hot at hand,
    Make gallant show and promise of their mettle;
    But when they should endure the bloody spur,
    They fall their crests and like deceitful jades
    Sink in the trial. Comes his army on?
  LUCILIUS. They meant his night in Sard is to be quarter'd;
    The greater part, the horse in general,
    Are come with Cassius.                     Low march within.
  BRUTUS. Hark, he is arrived.
    March gently on to meet him.

                  Enter Cassius and his Powers.

  CASSIUS. Stand, ho!
  BRUTUS. Stand, ho! Speak the word along.
  FIRST SOLDIER. Stand!
  SECOND SOLDIER. Stand!
  THIRD SOLDIER. Stand!
  CASSIUS. Most noble brother, you have done me wrong.
  BRUTUS. Judge me, you gods! Wrong I mine enemies?
    And, if not so, how should I wrong a brother?
  CASSIUS. Brutus, this sober form of yours hides wrongs,
    And when you do them-
  BRUTUS. Cassius, be content,
    Speak your griefs softly, I do know you well.
    Before the eyes of both our armies here,
    Which should perceive nothing but love from us,
    Let us not wrangle. Bid them move away;
    Then in my tent, Cassius, enlarge your griefs,
    And I will give you audience.
  CASSIUS. Pindarus,
    Bid our commanders lead their charges off
    A little from this ground.
  BRUTUS. Lucilius, do you the like, and let no man
    Come to our tent till we have done our conference.
    Let Lucius and Titinius guard our door.             Exeunt.




SCENE III.
Brutus' tent.

Enter Brutus and Cassius.

  CASSIUS. That you have wrong'd me doth appear in this:
    You have condemn'd and noted Lucius Pella
    For taking bribes here of the Sardians,
    Wherein my letters, praying on his side,
    Because I knew the man, were slighted off.
  BRUTUS. You wrong'd yourself to write in such a case.
  CASSIUS. In such a time as this it is not meet
    That every nice offense should bear his comment.
  BRUTUS. Let me tell you, Cassius, you yourself
    Are much condemn'd to have an itching palm,
    To sell and mart your offices for gold
    To undeservers.
  CASSIUS. I an itching palm?
    You know that you are Brutus that speaks this,
    Or, by the gods, this speech were else your last.
  BRUTUS. The name of Cassius honors this corruption,
    And chastisement doth therefore hide his head.
  CASSIUS. Chastisement?
  BRUTUS. Remember March, the ides of March remember.
    Did not great Julius bleed for justice' sake?
    What villain touch'd his body, that did stab,
    And not for justice? What, shall one of us,
    That struck the foremost man of all this world
    But for supporting robbers, shall we now
    Contaminate our fingers with base bribes
    And sell the mighty space of our large honors
    For so much trash as may be grasped thus?
    I had rather be a dog, and bay the moon,
    Than such a Roman.
  CASSIUS. Brutus, bait not me,
    I'll not endure it. You forget yourself
    To hedge me in. I am a soldier, I,
    Older in practice, abler than yourself
    To make conditions.
  BRUTUS. Go to, you are not, Cassius.
  CASSIUS. I am.
  BRUTUS. I say you are not.
  CASSIUS. Urge me no more, I shall forget myself;
    Have mind upon your health, tempt me no farther.
  BRUTUS. Away, slight man!
  CASSIUS. Is't possible?
  BRUTUS. Hear me, for I will speak.
    Must I give way and room to your rash choler?
    Shall I be frighted when a madman stares?
  CASSIUS. O gods, ye gods! Must I endure all this?
  BRUTUS. All this? Ay, more. Fret till your proud heart break.
    Go show your slaves how choleric you are,
    And make your bondmen tremble. Must I bouge?
    Must I observe you? Must I stand and crouch
    Under your testy humor? By the gods,
    You shall digest the venom of your spleen,
    Though it do split you, for, from this day forth,
    I'll use you for my mirth, yea, for my laughter,
    When you are waspish.
  CASSIUS. Is it come to this?
  BRUTUS. You say you are a better soldier:
    Let it appear so, make your vaunting true,
    And it shall please me well. For mine own part,
    I shall be glad to learn of noble men.
  CASSIUS. You wrong me every way, you wrong me, Brutus.
    I said, an elder soldier, not a better.
    Did I say "better"?
  BRUTUS. If you did, I care not.
  CASSIUS. When Caesar lived, he durst not thus have moved me.
  BRUTUS. Peace, peace! You durst not so have tempted him.
  CASSIUS. I durst not?
  BRUTUS. No.
  CASSIUS. What, durst not tempt him?
  BRUTUS. For your life you durst not.
  CASSIUS. Do not presume too much upon my love;
    I may do that I shall be sorry for.
  BRUTUS. You have done that you should be sorry for.
    There is no terror, Cassius, in your threats,
    For I am arm'd so strong in honesty,
    That they pass by me as the idle wind
    Which I respect not. I did send to you
    For certain sums of gold, which you denied me,
    For I can raise no money by vile means.
    By heaven, I had rather coin my heart
    And drop my blood for drachmas than to wring
    From the hard hands of peasants their vile trash
    By any indirection. I did send
    To you for gold to pay my legions,
    Which you denied me. Was that done like Cassius?
    Should I have answer'd Caius Cassius so?
    When Marcus Brutus grows so covetous
    To lock such rascal counters from his friends,
    Be ready, gods, with all your thunderbolts,
    Dash him to pieces!
  CASSIUS. I denied you not.
  BRUTUS. You did.
  CASSIUS. I did not. He was but a fool
    That brought my answer back. Brutus hath rived my heart.
    A friend should bear his friend's infirmities,
    But Brutus makes mine greater than they are.
  BRUTUS. I do not, till you practise them on me.
  CASSIUS. You love me not.
  BRUTUS. I do not like your faults.
  CASSIUS. A friendly eye could never see such faults.
  BRUTUS. A flatterer's would not, though they do appear
    As huge as high Olympus.
  CASSIUS. Come, Antony, and young Octavius, come,
    Revenge yourselves alone on Cassius,
    For Cassius is aweary of the world:
    Hated by one he loves; braved by his brother;
    Check'd like a bondman; all his faults observed,
    Set in a notebook, learn'd and conn'd by rote,
    To cast into my teeth. O, I could weep
    My spirit from mine eyes! There is my dagger,
    And here my naked breast; within, a heart
    Dearer than Pluto's mine, richer than gold.
    If that thou best a Roman, take it forth;
    I, that denied thee gold, will give my heart.
    Strike, as thou didst at Caesar, for I know,
    When thou didst hate him worst, thou lovedst him better
    Than ever thou lovedst Cassius.
  BRUTUS. Sheathe your dagger.
    Be angry when you will, it shall have scope;
    Do what you will, dishonor shall be humor.
    O Cassius, you are yoked with a lamb,
    That carries anger as the flint bears fire,
    Who, much enforced, shows a hasty spark
    And straight is cold again.
  CASSIUS. Hath Cassius lived
    To be but mirth and laughter to his Brutus,
    When grief and blood ill-temper'd vexeth him?
  BRUTUS. When I spoke that, I was ill-temper'd too.
  CASSIUS. Do you confess so much? Give me your hand.
  BRUTUS. And my heart too.
  CASSIUS. O Brutus!
  BRUTUS. What's the matter?
  CASSIUS. Have not you love enough to bear with me
    When that rash humor which my mother gave me
    Makes me forgetful?
  BRUTUS. Yes, Cassius, and from henceforth,
    When you are overearnest with your Brutus,
    He'll think your mother chides, and leave you so.
  POET. [Within.] Let me go in to see the generals.
    There is some grudge between 'em, 'tis not meet
    They be alone.
  LUCILIUS. [Within.] You shall not come to them.
  POET. [Within.] Nothing but death shall stay me.

      Enter Poet, followed by Lucilius, Titinius, and Lucius.

  CASSIUS. How now, what's the matter?
  POET. For shame, you generals! What do you mean?
    Love, and be friends, as two such men should be;
    For I have seen more years, I'm sure, than ye.
  CASSIUS. Ha, ha! How vilely doth this cynic rhyme!
  BRUTUS. Get you hence, sirrah; saucy fellow, hence!
  CASSIUS. Bear with him, Brutus; 'tis his fashion.
  BRUTUS. I'll know his humor when he knows his time.
    What should the wars do with these jigging fools?
    Companion, hence!
  CASSIUS. Away, away, be gone!                       Exit Poet.
  BRUTUS. Lucilius and Titinius, bid the commanders
    Prepare to lodge their companies tonight.
  CASSIUS. And come yourselves and bring Messala with you
    Immediately to us.             Exeunt Lucilius and Titinius.
  BRUTUS. Lucius, a bowl of wine!                   Exit Lucius.
  CASSIUS. I did not think you could have been so angry.
  BRUTUS. O Cassius, I am sick of many griefs.
  CASSIUS. Of your philosophy you make no use,
    If you give place to accidental evils.
  BRUTUS. No man bears sorrow better. Portia is dead.
  CASSIUS. Ha? Portia?
  BRUTUS. She is dead.
  CASSIUS. How 'scaped killing when I cross'd you so?
    O insupportable and touching loss!
    Upon what sickness?
  BRUTUS. Impatient of my absence,
    And grief that young Octavius with Mark Antony
    Have made themselves so strong- for with her death
    That tidings came- with this she fell distract,
    And (her attendants absent) swallow'd fire.
  CASSIUS. And died so?
  BRUTUS. Even so.
  CASSIUS. O ye immortal gods!

               Re-enter Lucius, with wine and taper.

  BRUTUS. Speak no more of her. Give me a bowl of wine.
    In this I bury all unkindness, Cassius.              Drinks.
  CASSIUS. My heart is thirsty for that noble pledge.
  Fill, Lucius, till the wine o'erswell the cup;
  I cannot drink too much of Brutus' love.               Drinks.
  BRUTUS. Come in, Titinius!                        Exit Lucius.

                 Re-enter Titinius, with Messala.

    Welcome, good Messala.
    Now sit we close about this taper here,
    And call in question our necessities.
  CASSIUS. Portia, art thou gone?
  BRUTUS. No more, I pray you.
    Messala, I have here received letters
    That young Octavius and Mark Antony
    Come down upon us with a mighty power,
    Bending their expedition toward Philippi.
  MESSALA. Myself have letters of the selfsame tenure.
  BRUTUS. With what addition?
  MESSALA. That by proscription and bills of outlawry
    Octavius, Antony, and Lepidus
    Have put to death an hundred senators.
  BRUTUS. There in our letters do not well agree;
    Mine speak of seventy senators that died
    By their proscriptions, Cicero being one.
  CASSIUS. Cicero one!
  MESSALA. Cicero is dead,
    And by that order of proscription.
    Had you your letters from your wife, my lord?
  BRUTUS. No, Messala.
  MESSALA. Nor nothing in your letters writ of her?
  BRUTUS. Nothing, Messala.
  MESSALA. That, methinks, is strange.
  BRUTUS. Why ask you? Hear you aught of her in yours?
  MESSALA. No, my lord.
  BRUTUS. Now, as you are a Roman, tell me true.
  MESSALA. Then like a Roman bear the truth I tell:
    For certain she is dead, and by strange manner.
  BRUTUS. Why, farewell, Portia. We must die, Messala.
    With meditating that she must die once
    I have the patience to endure it now.
  MESSALA. Even so great men great losses should endure.
  CASSIUS. I have as much of this in art as you,
    But yet my nature could not bear it so.
  BRUTUS. Well, to our work alive. What do you think
    Of marching to Philippi presently?
  CASSIUS. I do not think it good.
  BRUTUS. Your reason?
  CASSIUS. This it is:
    'Tis better that the enemy seek us;
    So shall he waste his means, weary his soldiers,
    Doing himself offense, whilst we lying still
    Are full of rest, defense, and nimbleness.
  BRUTUS. Good reasons must of force give place to better.
    The people 'twixt Philippi and this ground
    Do stand but in a forced affection,
    For they have grudged us contribution.
    The enemy, marching along by them,
    By them shall make a fuller number up,
    Come on refresh'd, new-added, and encouraged;
    From which advantage shall we cut him off
    If at Philippi we do face him there,
    These people at our back.
  CASSIUS. Hear me, good brother.
  BRUTUS. Under your pardon. You must note beside
    That we have tried the utmost of our friends,
    Our legions are brim-full, our cause is ripe:
    The enemy increaseth every day;
    We, at the height, are ready to decline.
    There is a tide in the affairs of men
    Which taken at the flood leads on to fortune;
    Omitted, all the voyage of their life
    Is bound in shallows and in miseries.
    On such a full sea are we now afloat,
    And we must take the current when it serves,
    Or lose our ventures.
  CASSIUS. Then, with your will, go on;
    We'll along ourselves and meet them at Philippi.
  BRUTUS. The deep of night is crept upon our talk,
    And nature must obey necessity,
    Which we will niggard with a little rest.
    There is no more to say?
  CASSIUS. No more. Good night.
    Early tomorrow will we rise and hence.
  BRUTUS. Lucius!

                       Re-enter Lucius.

    My gown.                                        Exit Lucius.
    Farewell, good Messala;
    Good night, Titinius; noble, noble Cassius,
    Good night and good repose.
  CASSIUS. O my dear brother!
    This was an ill beginning of the night.
    Never come such division 'tween our souls!
    Let it not, Brutus.
  BRUTUS. Everything is well.
  CASSIUS. Good night, my lord.
  BRUTUS. Good night, good brother.
  TITINIUS. MESSALA. Good night, Lord Brutus.
  BRUTUS. Farewell, everyone.
                                          Exeunt all but Brutus.

               Re-enter Lucius, with the gown.

    Give me the gown. Where is thy instrument?
  LUCIUS. Here in the tent.
  BRUTUS. What, thou speak'st drowsily?
    Poor knave, I blame thee not, thou art o'erwatch'd.
    Call Claudio and some other of my men,
    I'll have them sleep on cushions in my tent.
  LUCIUS. Varro and Claudio!

                   Enter Varro and Claudio.

  VARRO. Calls my lord?
  BRUTUS. I pray you, sirs, lie in my tent and sleep;
    It may be I shall raise you by and by
    On business to my brother Cassius.
  VARRO. So please you, we will stand and watch your pleasure.
  BRUTUS. I would not have it so. Lie down, good sirs.
    It may be I shall otherwise bethink me.
    Look Lucius, here's the book I sought for so;
    I put it in the pocket of my gown.
                                     Varro and Claudio lie down.
  LUCIUS. I was sure your lordship did not give it me.
  BRUTUS. Bear with me, good boy, I am much forgetful.
    Canst thou hold up thy heavy eyes awhile,
    And touch thy instrument a strain or two?
  LUCIUS. Ay, my lord, an't please you.
  BRUTUS. It does, my boy.
    I trouble thee too much, but thou art willing.
  LUCIUS. It is my duty, sir.
  BRUTUS. I should not urge thy duty past thy might;
    I know young bloods look for a time of rest.
  LUCIUS. I have slept, my lord, already.
  BRUTUS. It was well done, and thou shalt sleep again;
    I will not hold thee long. If I do live,
    I will be good to thee.                   Music, and a song.
    This is a sleepy tune. O murtherous slumber,
    Layest thou thy leaden mace upon my boy
    That plays thee music? Gentle knave, good night.
    I will not do thee so much wrong to wake thee.
    If thou dost nod, thou break'st thy instrument;
    I'll take it from thee; and, good boy, good night.
    Let me see, let me see; is not the leaf turn'd down
    Where I left reading? Here it is, I think.        Sits down.

                 Enter the Ghost of Caesar.

    How ill this taper burns! Ha, who comes here?
    I think it is the weakness of mine eyes
    That shapes this monstrous apparition.
    It comes upon me. Art thou anything?
    Art thou some god, some angel, or some devil
    That makest my blood cold and my hair to stare?
    Speak to me what thou art.
  GHOST. Thy evil spirit, Brutus.
  BRUTUS. Why comest thou?
  GHOST. To tell thee thou shalt see me at Philippi.
  BRUTUS. Well, then I shall see thee again?
  GHOST. Ay, at Philippi.
  BRUTUS. Why, I will see thee at Philippi then.     Exit Ghost.
    Now I have taken heart thou vanishest.
    Ill spirit, I would hold more talk with thee.
    Boy! Lucius! Varro! Claudio! Sirs, awake!
    Claudio!
  LUCIUS. The strings, my lord, are false.
  BRUTUS. He thinks he still is at his instrument.
    Lucius, awake!
  LUCIUS. My lord?
  BRUTUS. Didst thou dream, Lucius, that thou so criedst out?
  LUCIUS. My lord, I do not know that I did cry.
  BRUTUS. Yes, that thou didst. Didst thou see anything?
  LUCIUS. Nothing, my lord.
  BRUTUS. Sleep again, Lucius. Sirrah Claudio!
    [To Varro.] Fellow thou, awake!
  VARRO. My lord?
  CLAUDIO. My lord?
  BRUTUS. Why did you so cry out, sirs, in your sleep?
  VARRO. CLAUDIO. Did we, my lord?
  BRUTUS. Ay, saw you anything?
  VARRO. No, my lord, I saw nothing.
  CLAUDIO. Nor I, my lord.
  BRUTUS. Go and commend me to my brother Cassius;
    Bid him set on his powers betimes before,
    And we will follow.
  VARRO. CLAUDIO. It shall be done, my lord.             Exeunt.




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT V. SCENE I.
The plains of Philippi.

Enter Octavius, Antony, and their Army.

  OCTAVIUS. Now, Antony, our hopes are answered.
    You said the enemy would not come down,
    But keep the hills and upper regions.
    It proves not so. Their battles are at hand;
    They mean to warn us at Philippi here,
    Answering before we do demand of them.
  ANTONY. Tut, I am in their bosoms, and I know
    Wherefore they do it. They could be content
    To visit other places, and come down
    With fearful bravery, thinking by this face
    To fasten in our thoughts that they have courage;
    But 'tis not so.

                    Enter a Messenger.

  MESSENGER. Prepare you, generals.
    The enemy comes on in gallant show;
    Their bloody sign of battle is hung out,
    And something to be done immediately.
  ANTONY. Octavius, lead your battle softly on,
    Upon the left hand of the even field.
  OCTAVIUS. Upon the right hand I, keep thou the left.
  ANTONY. Why do you cross me in this exigent?
  OCTAVIUS. I do not cross you, but I will do so.

      March. Drum. Enter Brutus, Cassius, and their Army;
           Lucilius, Titinius, Messala, and others.

  BRUTUS. They stand, and would have parley.
  CASSIUS. Stand fast, Titinius; we must out and talk.
  OCTAVIUS. Mark Antony, shall we give sign of battle?
  ANTONY. No, Caesar, we will answer on their charge.
    Make forth, the generals would have some words.
  OCTAVIUS. Stir not until the signal not until the signal.
  BRUTUS. Words before blows. Is it so, countrymen?
  OCTAVIUS. Not that we love words better, as you do.
  BRUTUS. Good words are better than bad strokes, Octavius.
  ANTONY. In your bad strokes, Brutus, you give good words.
    Witness the hole you made in Caesar's heart,
    Crying "Long live! Hail, Caesar!"
  CASSIUS. Antony,
    The posture of your blows are yet unknown;
    But for your words, they rob the Hybla bees,
    And leave them honeyless.
  ANTONY. Not stingless too.
  BRUTUS. O, yes, and soundless too,
    For you have stol'n their buzzing, Antony,
    And very wisely threat before you sting.
  ANTONY. Villains! You did not so when your vile daggers
    Hack'd one another in the sides of Caesar.
    You show'd your teeth like apes, and fawn'd like hounds,
    And bow'd like bondmen, kissing Caesar's feet;
    Whilst damned Casca, like a cur, behind
    Strooke Caesar on the neck. O you flatterers!
  CASSIUS. Flatterers? Now, Brutus, thank yourself.
    This tongue had not offended so today,
    If Cassius might have ruled.
  OCTAVIUS. Come, come, the cause. If arguing make us sweat,
    The proof of it will turn to redder drops.
    Look,
    I draw a sword against conspirators;
    When think you that the sword goes up again?
    Never, till Caesar's three and thirty wounds
    Be well avenged, or till another Caesar
    Have added slaughter to the sword of traitors.
  BRUTUS. Caesar, thou canst not die by traitors' hands,
    Unless thou bring'st them with thee.
  OCTAVIUS. So I hope,
    I was not born to die on Brutus' sword.
  BRUTUS. O, if thou wert the noblest of thy strain,
    Young man, thou couldst not die more honorable.
  CASSIUS. A peevish school boy, worthless of such honor,
    Join'd with a masker and a reveler!
  ANTONY. Old Cassius still!
  OCTAVIUS. Come, Antony, away!
    Defiance, traitors, hurl we in your teeth.
    If you dare fight today, come to the field;
    If not, when you have stomachs.
                        Exeunt Octavius, Antony, and their Army.
  CASSIUS. Why, now, blow and, swell billow, and swim bark!
    The storm is up, and all is on the hazard.
  BRUTUS. Ho, Lucilius! Hark, a word with you.
  LUCILIUS. [Stands forth.] My lord?
                             Brutus and Lucilius converse apart.
  CASSIUS. Messala!
  MESSALA. [Stands forth.] What says my general?
  CASSIUS. Messala,
    This is my birthday, as this very day
    Was Cassius born. Give me thy hand, Messala.
    Be thou my witness that, against my will,
    As Pompey was, am I compell'd to set
    Upon one battle all our liberties.
    You know that I held Epicurus strong,
    And his opinion. Now I change my mind,
    And partly credit things that do presage.
    Coming from Sardis, on our former ensign
    Two mighty eagles fell, and there they perch'd,
    Gorging and feeding from our soldiers' hands,
    Who to Philippi here consorted us.
    This morning are they fled away and gone,
    And in their steads do ravens, crows, and kites
    Fly o'er our heads and downward look on us,
    As we were sickly prey. Their shadows seem
    A canopy most fatal, under which
    Our army lies, ready to give up the ghost.
  MESSALA. Believe not so.
  CASSIUS. I but believe it partly,
    For I am fresh of spirit and resolved
    To meet all perils very constantly.
  BRUTUS. Even so, Lucilius.
  CASSIUS. Now, most noble Brutus,
    The gods today stand friendly that we may,
    Lovers in peace, lead on our days to age!
    But, since the affairs of men rest still incertain,
    Let's reason with the worst that may befall.
    If we do lose this battle, then is this
    The very last time we shall speak together.
    What are you then determined to do?
  BRUTUS. Even by the rule of that philosophy
    By which I did blame Cato for the death
    Which he did give himself- I know not how,
    But I do find it cowardly and vile,
    For fear of what might fall, so to prevent
    The time of life- arming myself with patience
    To stay the providence of some high powers
    That govern us below.
  CASSIUS. Then, if we lose this battle,
    You are contented to be led in triumph
    Thorough the streets of Rome?
  BRUTUS. No, Cassius, no. Think not, thou noble Roman,
    That ever Brutus will go bound to Rome;
    He bears too great a mind. But this same day
    Must end that work the ides of March begun.
    And whether we shall meet again I know not.
    Therefore our everlasting farewell take.
    Forever, and forever, farewell, Cassius!
    If we do meet again, why, we shall smile;
    If not, why then this parting was well made.
  CASSIUS. Forever and forever farewell, Brutus!
    If we do meet again, we'll smile indeed;
    If not, 'tis true this parting was well made.
  BRUTUS. Why then, lead on. O, that a man might know
    The end of this day's business ere it come!
    But it sufficeth that the day will end,
    And then the end is known. Come, ho! Away!           Exeunt.




SCENE II.
The field of battle.

Alarum. Enter Brutus and Messala.

  BRUTUS. Ride, ride, Messala, ride, and give these bills
    Unto the legions on the other side.             Loud alarum.
    Let them set on at once, for I perceive
    But cold demeanor in Octavia's wing,
    And sudden push gives them the overthrow.
    Ride, ride, Messala. Let them all come down.         Exeunt.




SCENE III.
Another part of the field.

Alarums. Enter Cassius and Titinius.

  CASSIUS. O, look, Titinius, look, the villains fly!
    Myself have to mine own turn'd enemy.
    This ensign here of mine was turning back;
    I slew the coward, and did take it from him.
  TITINIUS. O Cassius, Brutus gave the word too early,
    Who, having some advantage on Octavius,
    Took it too eagerly. His soldiers fell to spoil,
    Whilst we by Antony are all enclosed.

                       Enter Pindarus.

  PINDARUS. Fly further off, my lord, fly further off;
    Mark Antony is in your tents, my lord;
    Fly, therefore, noble Cassius, fly far off.
  CASSIUS. This hill is far enough. Look, look, Titinius:
    Are those my tents where I perceive the fire?
  TITINIUS. They are, my lord.
  CASSIUS. Titinius, if thou lovest me,
    Mount thou my horse and hide thy spurs in him,
    Till he have brought thee up to yonder troops
    And here again, that I may rest assured
    Whether yond troops are friend or enemy.
  TITINIUS. I will be here again, even with a thought.     Exit.
  CASSIUS. Go, Pindarus, get higher on that hill;
    My sight was ever thick; regard Titinius,
    And tell me what thou notest about the field.
                                      Pindarus ascends the hill.
    This day I breathed first: time is come round,
    And where I did begin, there shall I end;
    My life is run his compass. Sirrah, what news?
  PINDARUS. [Above.] O my lord!
  CASSIUS. What news?
  PINDARUS. [Above.] Titinius is enclosed round about
    With horsemen, that make to him on the spur;
    Yet he spurs on. Now they are almost on him.
    Now, Titinius! Now some light. O, he lights too.
    He's ta'en [Shout.] And, hark! They shout for joy.
  CASSIUS. Come down; behold no more.
    O, coward that I am, to live so long,
    To see my best friend ta'en before my face!
                                              Pindarus descends.
    Come hither, sirrah.
    In Parthia did I take thee prisoner,
    And then I swore thee, saving of thy life,
    That whatsoever I did bid thee do,
    Thou shouldst attempt it. Come now, keep thine oath;
    Now be a freeman, and with this good sword,
    That ran through Caesar's bowels, search this bosom.
    Stand not to answer: here, take thou the hilts;
    And when my face is cover'd, as 'tis now,
    Guide thou the sword. [Pindarus stabs him.] Caesar, thou art
      revenged,
    Even with the sword that kill'd thee.                  Dies.
  PINDARUS. So, I am free, yet would not so have been,
    Durst I have done my will. O Cassius!
    Far from this country Pindarus shall run,
    Where never Roman shall take note of him.              Exit.

                Re-enter Titinius with Messala.

  MESSALA. It is but change, Titinius, for Octavius
    Is overthrown by noble Brutus' power,
    As Cassius' legions are by Antony.
  TITINIUS. These tidings would well comfort Cassius.
  MESSALA. Where did you leave him?
  TITINIUS. All disconsolate,
    With Pindarus his bondman, on this hill.
  MESSALA. Is not that he that lies upon the ground?
  TITINIUS. He lies not like the living. O my heart!
  MESSALA. Is not that he?
  TITINIUS. No, this was he, Messala,
    But Cassius is no more. O setting sun,
    As in thy red rays thou dost sink to night,
    So in his red blood Cassius' day is set,
    The sun of Rome is set! Our day is gone;
    Clouds, dews, and dangers come; our deeds are done!
    Mistrust of my success hath done this deed.
  MESSALA. Mistrust of good success hath done this deed.
    O hateful error, melancholy's child,
    Why dost thou show to the apt thoughts of men
    The things that are not? O error, soon conceived,
    Thou never comest unto a happy birth,
    But kill'st the mother that engender'd thee!
  TITINIUS. What, Pindarus! Where art thou, Pindarus?
  MESSALA. Seek him, Titinius, whilst I go to meet
    The noble Brutus, thrusting this report
    Into his ears. I may say "thrusting" it,
    For piercing steel and darts envenomed
    Shall be as welcome to the ears of Brutus
    As tidings of this sight.
  TITINIUS. Hie you, Messala,
    And I will seek for Pindarus the while.        Exit Messala.
    Why didst thou send me forth, brave Cassius?
    Did I not meet thy friends? And did not they
    Put on my brows this wreath of victory,
    And bid me give it thee? Didst thou not hear their shouts?
    Alas, thou hast misconstrued everything!
    But, hold thee, take this garland on thy brow;
    Thy Brutus bid me give it thee, and I
    Will do his bidding. Brutus, come apace,
    And see how I regarded Caius Cassius.
    By your leave, gods, this is a Roman's part.
    Come, Cassius' sword, and find Titinius' heart.
                                                  Kills himself.

       Alarum. Re-enter Messala, with Brutus, young Cato,
                         and others.

  BRUTUS. Where, where, Messala, doth his body lie?
  MESSALA. Lo, yonder, and Titinius mourning it.
  BRUTUS. Titinius' face is upward.
  CATO. He is slain.
  BRUTUS. O Julius Caesar, thou art mighty yet!
    Thy spirit walks abroad, and turns our swords
    In our own proper entrails.                     Low alarums.
  CATO. Brave Titinius!
    Look whe'er he have not crown'd dead Cassius!
  BRUTUS. Are yet two Romans living such as these?
    The last of all the Romans, fare thee well!
    It is impossible that ever Rome
    Should breed thy fellow. Friends, I owe moe tears
    To this dead man than you shall see me pay.
    I shall find time, Cassius, I shall find time.
    Come therefore, and to Thasos send his body;
    His funerals shall not be in our camp,
    Lest it discomfort us. Lucilius, come,
    And come, young Cato; let us to the field.
    Labio and Flavio, set our battles on.
    'Tis three o'clock, and Romans, yet ere night
    We shall try fortune in a second fight.              Exeunt.




SCENE IV.
Another part of the field.

Alarum. Enter, fighting, Soldiers of both armies; then Brutus, young Cato,
Lucilius, and others.

  BRUTUS. Yet, countrymen, O, yet hold up your heads!
  CATO. What bastard doth not? Who will go with me?
    I will proclaim my name about the field.
    I am the son of Marcus Cato, ho!
    A foe to tyrants, and my country's friend.
    I am the son of Marcus Cato, ho!
  BRUTUS. And I am Brutus, Marcus Brutus, I;
    Brutus, my country's friend; know me for Brutus!       Exit.
  LUCILIUS. O young and noble Cato, art thou down?
    Why, now thou diest as bravely as Titinius,
    And mayst be honor'd, being Cato's son.
  FIRST SOLDIER. Yield, or thou diest.
  LUCILIUS. Only I yield to die.
    [Offers money.] There is so much that thou wilt kill me straight:
    Kill Brutus, and be honor'd in his death.
  FIRST SOLDIER. We must not. A noble prisoner!
  SECOND SOLDIER. Room, ho! Tell Antony, Brutus is ta'en.
  FIRST SOLDIER. I'll tell the news. Here comes the general.

                         Enter Antony.

    Brutus is ta'en, Brutus is ta'en, my lord.
  ANTONY. Where is he?
  LUCILIUS. Safe, Antony, Brutus is safe enough.
    I dare assure thee that no enemy
    Shall ever take alive the noble Brutus;
    The gods defend him from so great a shame!
    When you do find him, or alive or dead,
    He will be found like Brutus, like himself.
  ANTONY. This is not Brutus, friend, but, I assure you,
    A prize no less in worth. Keep this man safe,
    Give him all kindness; I had rather have
    Such men my friends than enemies. Go on,
    And see wheer Brutus be alive or dead,
    And bring us word unto Octavius' tent
    How everything is chanced.                           Exeunt.




SCENE V.
Another part of the field.

Enter Brutus, Dardanius, Clitus, Strato, and Volumnius.

  BRUTUS. Come, poor remains of friends, rest on this rock.
  CLITUS. Statilius show'd the torchlight, but, my lord,
    He came not back. He is or ta'en or slain.
  BRUTUS. Sit thee down, Clitus. Slaying is the word:
    It is a deed in fashion. Hark thee, Clitus.        Whispers.
  CLITUS. What, I, my lord? No, not for all the world.
  BRUTUS. Peace then, no words.
  CLITUS. I'll rather kill myself.
  BRUTUS. Hark thee, Dardanius.                        Whispers.
  DARDANIUS. Shall I do such a deed?
  CLITUS. O Dardanius!
  DARDANIUS. O Clitus!
  CLITUS. What ill request did Brutus make to thee?
  DARDANIUS. To kill him, Clitus. Look, he meditates.
  CLITUS. Now is that noble vessel full of grief,
    That it runs over even at his eyes.
  BRUTUS. Come hither, good Volumnius, list a word.
  VOLUMNIUS. What says my lord?
  BRUTUS. Why, this, Volumnius:
    The ghost of Caesar hath appear'd to me
    Two several times by night; at Sardis once,
    And this last night here in Philippi fields.
    I know my hour is come.
  VOLUMNIUS. Not so, my lord.
  BRUTUS. Nay I am sure it is, Volumnius.
    Thou seest the world, Volumnius, how it goes;
    Our enemies have beat us to the pit;            Low alarums.
    It is more worthy to leap in ourselves
    Than tarry till they push us. Good Volumnius,
    Thou know'st that we two went to school together;
    Even for that our love of old, I prithee,
    Hold thou my sword-hilts, whilst I run on it.
  VOLUMNIUS. That's not an office for a friend, my lord.
                                                   Alarum still.
  CLITUS. Fly, fly, my lord, there is no tarrying here.
  BRUTUS. Farewell to you, and you, and you, Volumnius.
    Strato, thou hast been all this while asleep;
    Farewell to thee too, Strato. Countrymen,
    My heart doth joy that yet in all my life
    I found no man but he was true to me.
    I shall have glory by this losing day,
    More than Octavius and Mark Antony
    By this vile conquest shall attain unto.
    So, fare you well at once, for Brutus' tongue
    Hath almost ended his life's history.
    Night hangs upon mine eyes, my bones would rest
    That have but labor'd to attain this hour.
                            Alarum. Cry within, "Fly, fly, fly!"
  CLITUS. Fly, my lord, fly.
  BRUTUS. Hence! I will follow.
                        Exeunt Clitus, Dardanius, and Volumnius.
    I prithee, Strato, stay thou by thy lord.
    Thou art a fellow of a good respect;
    Thy life hath had some smatch of honor in it.
    Hold then my sword, and turn away thy face,
    While I do run upon it. Wilt thou, Strato?
  STRATO. Give me your hand first. Fare you well, my lord.
  BRUTUS. Farewell, good Strato.              Runs on his sword.
    Caesar, now be still;
    I kill'd not thee with half so good a will.            Dies.

     Alarum. Retreat. Enter Octavius, Antony, Messala,
                 Lucilius, and the Army.

  OCTAVIUS. What man is that?
  MESSALA. My master's man. Strato, where is thy master?
  STRATO. Free from the bondage you are in, Messala:
    The conquerors can but make a fire of him;
    For Brutus only overcame himself,
    And no man else hath honor by his death.
  LUCILIUS. So Brutus should be found. I thank thee, Brutus,
    That thou hast proved Lucilius' saying true.
  OCTAVIUS. All that served Brutus, I will entertain them.
    Fellow, wilt thou bestow thy time with me?
  STRATO. Ay, if Messala will prefer me to you.
  OCTAVIUS. Do so, good Messala.
  MESSALA. How died my master, Strato?
  STRATO. I held the sword, and he did run on it.
  MESSALA. Octavius, then take him to follow thee
    That did the latest service to my master.
  ANTONY. This was the noblest Roman of them all.
    All the conspirators, save only he,
    Did that they did in envy of great Caesar;
    He only, in a general honest thought
    And common good to all, made one of them.
    His life was gentle, and the elements
    So mix'd in him that Nature might stand up
    And say to all the world, "This was a man!"
  OCTAVIUS. According to his virtue let us use him
    With all respect and rites of burial.
    Within my tent his bones tonight shall lie,
    Most like a soldier, ordered honorably.
    So call the field to rest, and let's away,
    To part the glories of this happy day.              Exeunt.


THE END



<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>






1606


THE TRAGEDY OF KING LEAR

by William Shakespeare




Dramatis Personae

      Lear, King of Britain.
      King of France.
      Duke of Burgundy.
      Duke of Cornwall.
      Duke of Albany.
      Earl of Kent.
      Earl of Gloucester.
      Edgar, son of Gloucester.
      Edmund, bastard son to Gloucester.
      Curan, a courtier.
      Old Man, tenant to Gloucester.
      Doctor.
      Lear's Fool.
      Oswald, steward to Goneril.
      A Captain under Edmund's command.
      Gentlemen.
      A Herald.
      Servants to Cornwall.

      Goneril, daughter to Lear.
      Regan, daughter to Lear.
      Cordelia, daughter to Lear.

      Knights attending on Lear, Officers, Messengers, Soldiers,
        Attendants.




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



Scene: - Britain.


ACT I. Scene I.
[King Lear's Palace.]

Enter Kent, Gloucester, and Edmund. [Kent and Glouceste converse.
Edmund stands back.]

  Kent. I thought the King had more affected the Duke of Albany than
     Cornwall.
  Glou. It did always seem so to us; but now, in the division of the
     kingdom, it appears not which of the Dukes he values most, for
     equalities are so weigh'd that curiosity in neither can make
     choice of either's moiety.
  Kent. Is not this your son, my lord?
  Glou. His breeding, sir, hath been at my charge. I have so often
     blush'd to acknowledge him that now I am braz'd to't.
  Kent. I cannot conceive you.
  Glou. Sir, this young fellow's mother could; whereupon she grew
     round-womb'd, and had indeed, sir, a son for her cradle ere she
     had a husband for her bed. Do you smell a fault?
  Kent. I cannot wish the fault undone, the issue of it being so
     proper.
  Glou. But I have, sir, a son by order of law, some year elder than
     this, who yet is no dearer in my account. Though this knave came
     something saucily into the world before he was sent for, yet was
     his mother fair, there was good sport at his making, and the
     whoreson must be acknowledged.- Do you know this noble gentleman,
     Edmund?
  Edm. [comes forward] No, my lord.
  Glou. My Lord of Kent. Remember him hereafter as my honourable
     friend.
  Edm. My services to your lordship.
  Kent. I must love you, and sue to know you better.
  Edm. Sir, I shall study deserving.
  Glou. He hath been out nine years, and away he shall again.
                                                 Sound a sennet.
     The King is coming.

      Enter one bearing a coronet; then Lear; then the Dukes of
      Albany and Cornwall; next, Goneril, Regan, Cordelia, with
                              Followers.

  Lear. Attend the lords of France and Burgundy, Gloucester.
  Glou. I shall, my liege.
                                 Exeunt [Gloucester and Edmund].
  Lear. Meantime we shall express our darker purpose.
     Give me the map there. Know we have divided
     In three our kingdom; and 'tis our fast intent
     To shake all cares and business from our age,
     Conferring them on younger strengths while we
     Unburthen'd crawl toward death. Our son of Cornwall,
     And you, our no less loving son of Albany,
     We have this hour a constant will to publish
     Our daughters' several dowers, that future strife
     May be prevented now. The princes, France and Burgundy,
     Great rivals in our youngest daughter's love,
     Long in our court have made their amorous sojourn,
     And here are to be answer'd. Tell me, my daughters
     (Since now we will divest us both of rule,
     Interest of territory, cares of state),
     Which of you shall we say doth love us most?
     That we our largest bounty may extend
     Where nature doth with merit challenge. Goneril,
     Our eldest-born, speak first.
  Gon. Sir, I love you more than words can wield the matter;
     Dearer than eyesight, space, and liberty;
     Beyond what can be valued, rich or rare;
     No less than life, with grace, health, beauty, honour;
     As much as child e'er lov'd, or father found;
     A love that makes breath poor, and speech unable.
     Beyond all manner of so much I love you.
  Cor. [aside] What shall Cordelia speak? Love, and be silent.
  Lear. Of all these bounds, even from this line to this,
     With shadowy forests and with champains rich'd,
     With plenteous rivers and wide-skirted meads,
     We make thee lady. To thine and Albany's issue
     Be this perpetual.- What says our second daughter,
     Our dearest Regan, wife to Cornwall? Speak.
  Reg. Sir, I am made
     Of the selfsame metal that my sister is,
     And prize me at her worth. In my true heart
     I find she names my very deed of love;
     Only she comes too short, that I profess
     Myself an enemy to all other joys
     Which the most precious square of sense possesses,
     And find I am alone felicitate
     In your dear Highness' love.
  Cor. [aside] Then poor Cordelia!
     And yet not so; since I am sure my love's
     More richer than my tongue.
  Lear. To thee and thine hereditary ever
     Remain this ample third of our fair kingdom,
     No less in space, validity, and pleasure
     Than that conferr'd on Goneril.- Now, our joy,
     Although the last, not least; to whose young love
     The vines of France and milk of Burgundy
     Strive to be interest; what can you say to draw
     A third more opulent than your sisters? Speak.
  Cor. Nothing, my lord.
  Lear. Nothing?
  Cor. Nothing.
  Lear. Nothing can come of nothing. Speak again.
  Cor. Unhappy that I am, I cannot heave
     My heart into my mouth. I love your Majesty
     According to my bond; no more nor less.
  Lear. How, how, Cordelia? Mend your speech a little,
     Lest it may mar your fortunes.
  Cor. Good my lord,
     You have begot me, bred me, lov'd me; I
     Return those duties back as are right fit,
     Obey you, love you, and most honour you.
     Why have my sisters husbands, if they say
     They love you all? Haply, when I shall wed,
     That lord whose hand must take my plight shall carry
     Half my love with him, half my care and duty.
     Sure I shall never marry like my sisters,
     To love my father all.
  Lear. But goes thy heart with this?
  Cor. Ay, good my lord.
  Lear. So young, and so untender?
  Cor. So young, my lord, and true.
  Lear. Let it be so! thy truth then be thy dower!
     For, by the sacred radiance of the sun,
     The mysteries of Hecate and the night;
     By all the operation of the orbs
     From whom we do exist and cease to be;
     Here I disclaim all my paternal care,
     Propinquity and property of blood,
     And as a stranger to my heart and me
     Hold thee from this for ever. The barbarous Scythian,
     Or he that makes his generation messes
     To gorge his appetite, shall to my bosom
     Be as well neighbour'd, pitied, and reliev'd,
     As thou my sometime daughter.
  Kent. Good my liege-
  Lear. Peace, Kent!
     Come not between the dragon and his wrath.
     I lov'd her most, and thought to set my rest
     On her kind nursery.- Hence and avoid my sight!-
     So be my grave my peace as here I give
     Her father's heart from her! Call France! Who stirs?
     Call Burgundy! Cornwall and Albany,
     With my two daughters' dowers digest this third;
     Let pride, which she calls plainness, marry her.
     I do invest you jointly in my power,
     Preeminence, and all the large effects
     That troop with majesty. Ourself, by monthly course,
     With reservation of an hundred knights,
     By you to be sustain'd, shall our abode
     Make with you by due turns. Only we still retain
     The name, and all th' additions to a king. The sway,
     Revenue, execution of the rest,
     Beloved sons, be yours; which to confirm,
     This coronet part betwixt you.
  Kent. Royal Lear,
     Whom I have ever honour'd as my king,
     Lov'd as my father, as my master follow'd,
     As my great patron thought on in my prayers-
  Lear. The bow is bent and drawn; make from the shaft.
  Kent. Let it fall rather, though the fork invade
     The region of my heart! Be Kent unmannerly
     When Lear is mad. What wouldst thou do, old man?
     Think'st thou that duty shall have dread to speak
     When power to flattery bows? To plainness honour's bound
     When majesty falls to folly. Reverse thy doom;
     And in thy best consideration check
     This hideous rashness. Answer my life my judgment,
     Thy youngest daughter does not love thee least,
     Nor are those empty-hearted whose low sound
     Reverbs no hollowness.
  Lear. Kent, on thy life, no more!
  Kent. My life I never held but as a pawn
     To wage against thine enemies; nor fear to lose it,
     Thy safety being the motive.
  Lear. Out of my sight!
  Kent. See better, Lear, and let me still remain
     The true blank of thine eye.
  Lear. Now by Apollo-
  Kent. Now by Apollo, King,
     Thou swear'st thy gods in vain.
  Lear. O vassal! miscreant!
                                   [Lays his hand on his sword.]
  Alb., Corn. Dear sir, forbear!
  Kent. Do!
     Kill thy physician, and the fee bestow
     Upon the foul disease. Revoke thy gift,
     Or, whilst I can vent clamour from my throat,
     I'll tell thee thou dost evil.
  Lear. Hear me, recreant!
     On thine allegiance, hear me!
     Since thou hast sought to make us break our vow-
     Which we durst never yet- and with strain'd pride
     To come between our sentence and our power,-
     Which nor our nature nor our place can bear,-
     Our potency made good, take thy reward.
     Five days we do allot thee for provision
     To shield thee from diseases of the world,
     And on the sixth to turn thy hated back
     Upon our kingdom. If, on the tenth day following,
     Thy banish'd trunk be found in our dominions,
     The moment is thy death. Away! By Jupiter,
     This shall not be revok'd.
  Kent. Fare thee well, King. Since thus thou wilt appear,
     Freedom lives hence, and banishment is here.
     [To Cordelia] The gods to their dear shelter take thee, maid,
     That justly think'st and hast most rightly said!
     [To Regan and Goneril] And your large speeches may your deeds
        approve,
     That good effects may spring from words of love.
     Thus Kent, O princes, bids you all adieu;
     He'll shape his old course in a country new.
Exit.

  Flourish. Enter Gloucester, with France and Burgundy; Attendants.

  Glou. Here's France and Burgundy, my noble lord.
  Lear. My Lord of Burgundy,
     We first address toward you, who with this king
     Hath rivall'd for our daughter. What in the least
     Will you require in present dower with her,
     Or cease your quest of love?
  Bur. Most royal Majesty,
     I crave no more than hath your Highness offer'd,
     Nor will you tender less.
  Lear. Right noble Burgundy,
     When she was dear to us, we did hold her so;
     But now her price is fall'n. Sir, there she stands.
     If aught within that little seeming substance,
     Or all of it, with our displeasure piec'd,
     And nothing more, may fitly like your Grace,
     She's there, and she is yours.
  Bur. I know no answer.
  Lear. Will you, with those infirmities she owes,
     Unfriended, new adopted to our hate,
     Dow'r'd with our curse, and stranger'd with our oath,
     Take her, or leave her?
  Bur. Pardon me, royal sir.
     Election makes not up on such conditions.
  Lear. Then leave her, sir; for, by the pow'r that made me,
     I tell you all her wealth. [To France] For you, great King,
     I would not from your love make such a stray
     To match you where I hate; therefore beseech you
     T' avert your liking a more worthier way
     Than on a wretch whom nature is asham'd
     Almost t' acknowledge hers.
  France. This is most strange,
     That she that even but now was your best object,
     The argument of your praise, balm of your age,
     Most best, most dearest, should in this trice of time
     Commit a thing so monstrous to dismantle
     So many folds of favour. Sure her offence
     Must be of such unnatural degree
     That monsters it, or your fore-vouch'd affection
     Fall'n into taint; which to believe of her
     Must be a faith that reason without miracle
     Should never plant in me.
  Cor. I yet beseech your Majesty,
     If for I want that glib and oily art
     To speak and purpose not, since what I well intend,
     I'll do't before I speak- that you make known
     It is no vicious blot, murther, or foulness,
     No unchaste action or dishonoured step,
     That hath depriv'd me of your grace and favour;
     But even for want of that for which I am richer-
     A still-soliciting eye, and such a tongue
     As I am glad I have not, though not to have it
     Hath lost me in your liking.
  Lear. Better thou
     Hadst not been born than not t' have pleas'd me better.
  France. Is it but this- a tardiness in nature
     Which often leaves the history unspoke
     That it intends to do? My Lord of Burgundy,
     What say you to the lady? Love's not love
     When it is mingled with regards that stands
     Aloof from th' entire point. Will you have her?
     She is herself a dowry.
  Bur. Royal Lear,
     Give but that portion which yourself propos'd,
     And here I take Cordelia by the hand,
     Duchess of Burgundy.
  Lear. Nothing! I have sworn; I am firm.
  Bur. I am sorry then you have so lost a father
     That you must lose a husband.
  Cor. Peace be with Burgundy!
     Since that respects of fortune are his love,
     I shall not be his wife.
  France. Fairest Cordelia, that art most rich, being poor;
     Most choice, forsaken; and most lov'd, despis'd!
     Thee and thy virtues here I seize upon.
     Be it lawful I take up what's cast away.
     Gods, gods! 'tis strange that from their cold'st neglect
     My love should kindle to inflam'd respect.
     Thy dow'rless daughter, King, thrown to my chance,
     Is queen of us, of ours, and our fair France.
     Not all the dukes in wat'rish Burgundy
     Can buy this unpriz'd precious maid of me.
     Bid them farewell, Cordelia, though unkind.
     Thou losest here, a better where to find.
  Lear. Thou hast her, France; let her be thine; for we
     Have no such daughter, nor shall ever see
     That face of hers again. Therefore be gone
     Without our grace, our love, our benison.
     Come, noble Burgundy.
             Flourish. Exeunt Lear, Burgundy, [Cornwall, Albany,
                                    Gloucester, and Attendants].
  France. Bid farewell to your sisters.
  Cor. The jewels of our father, with wash'd eyes
     Cordelia leaves you. I know you what you are;
     And, like a sister, am most loath to call
     Your faults as they are nam'd. Use well our father.
     To your professed bosoms I commit him;
     But yet, alas, stood I within his grace,
     I would prefer him to a better place!
     So farewell to you both.
  Gon. Prescribe not us our duties.
  Reg. Let your study
     Be to content your lord, who hath receiv'd you
     At fortune's alms. You have obedience scanted,
     And well are worth the want that you have wanted.
  Cor. Time shall unfold what plighted cunning hides.
     Who cover faults, at last shame them derides.
     Well may you prosper!
  France. Come, my fair Cordelia.
                                     Exeunt France and Cordelia.
  Gon. Sister, it is not little I have to say of what most nearly
     appertains to us both. I think our father will hence to-night.
  Reg. That's most certain, and with you; next month with us.
  Gon. You see how full of changes his age is. The observation we
     have made of it hath not been little. He always lov'd our
     sister most, and with what poor judgment he hath now cast her
     off appears too grossly.
  Reg. 'Tis the infirmity of his age; yet he hath ever but slenderly
     known himself.
  Gon. The best and soundest of his time hath been but rash; then
     must we look to receive from his age, not alone the
     imperfections of long-ingraffed condition, but therewithal
     the unruly waywardness that infirm and choleric years bring with
     them.
  Reg. Such unconstant starts are we like to have from him as this
     of Kent's banishment.
  Gon. There is further compliment of leave-taking between France and
     him. Pray you let's hit together. If our father carry authority
     with such dispositions as he bears, this last surrender of his
     will but offend us.
  Reg. We shall further think on't.
  Gon. We must do something, and i' th' heat.
                                                         Exeunt.




Scene II.
The Earl of Gloucester's Castle.

Enter [Edmund the] Bastard solus, [with a letter].

  Edm. Thou, Nature, art my goddess; to thy law
     My services are bound. Wherefore should I
     Stand in the plague of custom, and permit
     The curiosity of nations to deprive me,
     For that I am some twelve or fourteen moonshines
     Lag of a brother? Why bastard? wherefore base?
     When my dimensions are as well compact,
     My mind as generous, and my shape as true,
     As honest madam's issue? Why brand they us
     With base? with baseness? bastardy? base, base?
     Who, in the lusty stealth of nature, take
     More composition and fierce quality
     Than doth, within a dull, stale, tired bed,
     Go to th' creating a whole tribe of fops
     Got 'tween asleep and wake? Well then,
     Legitimate Edgar, I must have your land.
     Our father's love is to the bastard Edmund
     As to th' legitimate. Fine word- 'legitimate'!
     Well, my legitimate, if this letter speed,
     And my invention thrive, Edmund the base
     Shall top th' legitimate. I grow; I prosper.
     Now, gods, stand up for bastards!

                          Enter Gloucester.

  Glou. Kent banish'd thus? and France in choler parted?
     And the King gone to-night? subscrib'd his pow'r?
     Confin'd to exhibition? All this done
     Upon the gad? Edmund, how now? What news?
  Edm. So please your lordship, none.
                                           [Puts up the letter.]
  Glou. Why so earnestly seek you to put up that letter?
  Edm. I know no news, my lord.
  Glou. What paper were you reading?
  Edm. Nothing, my lord.
  Glou. No? What needed then that terrible dispatch of it into your
     pocket? The quality of nothing hath not such need to hide
     itself. Let's see. Come, if it be nothing, I shall not need
     spectacles.
  Edm. I beseech you, sir, pardon me. It is a letter from my brother
     that I have not all o'er-read; and for so much as I have
     perus'd, I find it not fit for your o'erlooking.
  Glou. Give me the letter, sir.
  Edm. I shall offend, either to detain or give it. The contents, as
     in part I understand them, are to blame.
  Glou. Let's see, let's see!
  Edm. I hope, for my brother's justification, he wrote this but as
     an essay or taste of my virtue.

  Glou. (reads) 'This policy and reverence of age makes the world
     bitter to the best of our times; keeps our fortunes from us
     till our oldness cannot relish them. I begin to find an idle
     and fond bondage in the oppression of aged tyranny, who sways,
     not as it hath power, but as it is suffer'd. Come to me, that
     of this I may speak more. If our father would sleep till I
     wak'd him, you should enjoy half his revenue for ever, and live
     the beloved of your brother,
                                                        'EDGAR.'

     Hum! Conspiracy? 'Sleep till I wak'd him, you should enjoy half
     his revenue.' My son Edgar! Had he a hand to write this? a heart
     and brain to breed it in? When came this to you? Who brought it?
  Edm. It was not brought me, my lord: there's the cunning of it. I
     found it thrown in at the casement of my closet.
  Glou. You know the character to be your brother's?
  Edm. If the matter were good, my lord, I durst swear it were his;
     but in respect of that, I would fain think it were not.
  Glou. It is his.
  Edm. It is his hand, my lord; but I hope his heart is not in the
     contents.
  Glou. Hath he never before sounded you in this business?
  Edm. Never, my lord. But I have heard him oft maintain it to be fit
     that, sons at perfect age, and fathers declining, the father
     should be as ward to the son, and the son manage his revenue.
  Glou. O villain, villain! His very opinion in the letter! Abhorred
     villain! Unnatural, detested, brutish villain! worse than
     brutish! Go, sirrah, seek him. I'll apprehend him. Abominable
     villain! Where is he?
  Edm. I do not well know, my lord. If it shall please you to suspend
     your indignation against my brother till you can derive from him
     better testimony of his intent, you should run a certain course;
     where, if you violently proceed against him, mistaking his
     purpose, it would make a great gap in your own honour and shake
     in pieces the heart of his obedience. I dare pawn down my life
     for him that he hath writ this to feel my affection to your
     honour, and to no other pretence of danger.
  Glou. Think you so?
  Edm. If your honour judge it meet, I will place you where you shall
     hear us confer of this and by an auricular assurance have your
     satisfaction, and that without any further delay than this very
     evening.
  Glou. He cannot be such a monster.
  Edm. Nor is not, sure.
  Glou. To his father, that so tenderly and entirely loves him.
     Heaven and earth! Edmund, seek him out; wind me into him, I pray
     you; frame the business after your own wisdom. I would unstate
     myself to be in a due resolution.
  Edm. I will seek him, sir, presently; convey the business as I
     shall find means, and acquaint you withal.
  Glou. These late eclipses in the sun and moon portend no good to
     us. Though the wisdom of nature can reason it thus and thus, yet
     nature finds itself scourg'd by the sequent effects. Love cools,
     friendship falls off, brothers divide. In cities, mutinies; in
     countries, discord; in palaces, treason; and the bond crack'd
     'twixt son and father. This villain of mine comes under the
     prediction; there's son against father: the King falls from bias
     of nature; there's father against child. We have seen the best
     of our time. Machinations, hollowness, treachery, and all
     ruinous disorders follow us disquietly to our graves. Find out
     this villain, Edmund; it shall lose thee nothing; do it
     carefully. And the noble and true-hearted Kent banish'd! his
     offence, honesty! 'Tis strange.                       Exit.
  Edm. This is the excellent foppery of the world, that, when we are
     sick in fortune, often the surfeit of our own behaviour, we make
     guilty of our disasters the sun, the moon, and the stars; as if
     we were villains on necessity; fools by heavenly compulsion;
     knaves, thieves, and treachers by spherical pre-dominance;
     drunkards, liars, and adulterers by an enforc'd obedience of
     planetary influence; and all that we are evil in, by a divine
     thrusting on. An admirable evasion of whore-master man, to lay
     his goatish disposition to the charge of a star! My father
     compounded with my mother under the Dragon's Tail, and my
     nativity was under Ursa Major, so that it follows I am rough and
     lecherous. Fut! I should have been that I am, had the
     maidenliest star in the firmament twinkled on my bastardizing.
     Edgar-

                             Enter Edgar.

     and pat! he comes, like the catastrophe of the old comedy. My
     cue is villainous melancholy, with a sigh like Tom o' Bedlam.
     O, these eclipses do portend these divisions! Fa, sol, la, mi.
  Edg. How now, brother Edmund? What serious contemplation are you
     in?
  Edm. I am thinking, brother, of a prediction I read this other day,
     what should follow these eclipses.
  Edg. Do you busy yourself with that?
  Edm. I promise you, the effects he writes of succeed unhappily: as
     of unnaturalness between the child and the parent; death,
     dearth, dissolutions of ancient amities; divisions in state,
     menaces and maledictions against king and nobles; needless
     diffidences, banishment of friends, dissipation of cohorts,
     nuptial breaches, and I know not what.
  Edg. How long have you been a sectary astronomical?
  Edm. Come, come! When saw you my father last?
  Edg. The night gone by.
  Edm. Spake you with him?
  Edg. Ay, two hours together.
  Edm. Parted you in good terms? Found you no displeasure in him by
     word or countenance
  Edg. None at all.
  Edm. Bethink yourself wherein you may have offended him; and at my
     entreaty forbear his presence until some little time hath
     qualified the heat of his displeasure, which at this instant so
     rageth in him that with the mischief of your person it would
     scarcely allay.
  Edg. Some villain hath done me wrong.
  Edm. That's my fear. I pray you have a continent forbearance till
     the speed of his rage goes slower; and, as I say, retire with me
     to my lodging, from whence I will fitly bring you to hear my
     lord speak. Pray ye, go! There's my key. If you do stir abroad,
     go arm'd.
  Edg. Arm'd, brother?
  Edm. Brother, I advise you to the best. Go arm'd. I am no honest man
     if there be any good meaning toward you. I have told you what I
     have seen and heard; but faintly, nothing like the image and
     horror of it. Pray you, away!
  Edg. Shall I hear from you anon?
  Edm. I do serve you in this business.
                                                     Exit Edgar.
     A credulous father! and a brother noble,
     Whose nature is so far from doing harms
     That he suspects none; on whose foolish honesty
     My practices ride easy! I see the business.
     Let me, if not by birth, have lands by wit;
     All with me's meet that I can fashion fit.
Exit.




Scene III.
The Duke of Albany's Palace.

Enter Goneril and [her] Steward [Oswald].

  Gon. Did my father strike my gentleman for chiding of his fool?
  Osw. Ay, madam.
  Gon. By day and night, he wrongs me! Every hour
     He flashes into one gross crime or other
     That sets us all at odds. I'll not endure it.
     His knights grow riotous, and himself upbraids us
     On every trifle. When he returns from hunting,
     I will not speak with him. Say I am sick.
     If you come slack of former services,
     You shall do well; the fault of it I'll answer.
                                                 [Horns within.]
  Osw. He's coming, madam; I hear him.
  Gon. Put on what weary negligence you please,
     You and your fellows. I'd have it come to question.
     If he distaste it, let him to our sister,
     Whose mind and mine I know in that are one,
     Not to be overrul'd. Idle old man,
     That still would manage those authorities
     That he hath given away! Now, by my life,
     Old fools are babes again, and must be us'd
     With checks as flatteries, when they are seen abus'd.
     Remember what I have said.
  Osw. Very well, madam.
  Gon. And let his knights have colder looks among you.
     What grows of it, no matter. Advise your fellows so.
     I would breed from hence occasions, and I shall,
     That I may speak. I'll write straight to my sister
     To hold my very course. Prepare for dinner.
                                                         Exeunt.




Scene IV.
The Duke of Albany's Palace.

Enter Kent, [disguised].

  Kent. If but as well I other accents borrow,
     That can my speech defuse, my good intent
     May carry through itself to that full issue
     For which I raz'd my likeness. Now, banish'd Kent,
     If thou canst serve where thou dost stand condemn'd,
     So may it come, thy master, whom thou lov'st,
     Shall find thee full of labours.

         Horns within. Enter Lear, [Knights,] and Attendants.

  Lear. Let me not stay a jot for dinner; go get it ready. [Exit
     an Attendant.] How now? What art thou?
  Kent. A man, sir.
  Lear. What dost thou profess? What wouldst thou with us?
  Kent. I do profess to be no less than I seem, to serve him truly
     that will put me in trust, to love him that is honest, to
     converse with him that is wise and says little, to fear
     judgment, to fight when I cannot choose, and to eat no fish.
  Lear. What art thou?
  Kent. A very honest-hearted fellow, and as poor as the King.
  Lear. If thou be'st as poor for a subject as he's for a king, thou
     art poor enough. What wouldst thou?
  Kent. Service.
  Lear. Who wouldst thou serve?
  Kent. You.
  Lear. Dost thou know me, fellow?
  Kent. No, sir; but you have that in your countenance which I would
     fain call master.
  Lear. What's that?
  Kent. Authority.
  Lear. What services canst thou do?
  Kent. I can keep honest counsel, ride, run, mar a curious tale in
     telling it and deliver a plain message bluntly. That which
     ordinary men are fit for, I am qualified in, and the best of me
     is diligence.
  Lear. How old art thou?
  Kent. Not so young, sir, to love a woman for singing, nor so old to
     dote on her for anything. I have years on my back forty-eight.
  Lear. Follow me; thou shalt serve me. If I like thee no worse after
     dinner, I will not part from thee yet. Dinner, ho, dinner!
     Where's my knave? my fool? Go you and call my fool hither.

                                            [Exit an attendant.]

                     Enter [Oswald the] Steward.

     You, you, sirrah, where's my daughter?
  Osw. So please you-                                      Exit.
  Lear. What says the fellow there? Call the clotpoll back.
     [Exit a Knight.] Where's my fool, ho? I think the world's
     asleep.

                            [Enter Knight]

     How now? Where's that mongrel?
  Knight. He says, my lord, your daughter is not well.
  Lear. Why came not the slave back to me when I call'd him?
  Knight. Sir, he answered me in the roundest manner, he would not.
  Lear. He would not?
  Knight. My lord, I know not what the matter is; but to my judgment
     your Highness is not entertain'd with that ceremonious affection
     as you were wont. There's a great abatement of kindness appears
     as well in the general dependants as in the Duke himself also
     and your daughter.
  Lear. Ha! say'st thou so?
  Knight. I beseech you pardon me, my lord, if I be mistaken; for
     my duty cannot be silent when I think your Highness wrong'd.
  Lear. Thou but rememb'rest me of mine own conception. I have
     perceived a most faint neglect of late, which I have rather
     blamed as mine own jealous curiosity than as a very pretence
     and purpose of unkindness. I will look further into't. But
     where's my fool? I have not seen him this two days.
  Knight. Since my young lady's going into France, sir, the fool
     hath much pined away.
  Lear. No more of that; I have noted it well. Go you and tell my
     daughter I would speak with her. [Exit Knight.] Go you, call
     hither my fool.
                                            [Exit an Attendant.]

                     Enter [Oswald the] Steward.

     O, you, sir, you! Come you hither, sir. Who am I, sir?
  Osw. My lady's father.
  Lear. 'My lady's father'? My lord's knave! You whoreson dog! you
     slave! you cur!
  Osw. I am none of these, my lord; I beseech your pardon.
  Lear. Do you bandy looks with me, you rascal?
                                                  [Strikes him.]
  Osw. I'll not be strucken, my lord.
  Kent. Nor tripp'd neither, you base football player?
                                            [Trips up his heels.
  Lear. I thank thee, fellow. Thou serv'st me, and I'll love thee.
  Kent. Come, sir, arise, away! I'll teach you differences. Away,
     away! If you will measure your lubber's length again, tarry; but
     away! Go to! Have you wisdom? So.
                                               [Pushes him out.]
  Lear. Now, my friendly knave, I thank thee. There's earnest of thy
     service.                                     [Gives money.]

                             Enter Fool.

  Fool. Let me hire him too. Here's my coxcomb.
                                          [Offers Kent his cap.]
  Lear. How now, my pretty knave? How dost thou?
  Fool. Sirrah, you were best take my coxcomb.
  Kent. Why, fool?
  Fool. Why? For taking one's part that's out of favour. Nay, an thou
     canst not smile as the wind sits, thou'lt catch cold shortly.
     There, take my coxcomb! Why, this fellow hath banish'd two on's
     daughters, and did the third a blessing against his will. If
     thou follow him, thou must needs wear my coxcomb.- How now,
     nuncle? Would I had two coxcombs and two daughters!
  Lear. Why, my boy?
  Fool. If I gave them all my living, I'ld keep my coxcombs myself.
     There's mine! beg another of thy daughters.
  Lear. Take heed, sirrah- the whip.
  Fool. Truth's a dog must to kennel; he must be whipp'd out, when
     Lady the brach may stand by th' fire and stink.
  Lear. A pestilent gall to me!
  Fool. Sirrah, I'll teach thee a speech.
  Lear. Do.
  Fool. Mark it, nuncle.
          Have more than thou showest,
          Speak less than thou knowest,
          Lend less than thou owest,
          Ride more than thou goest,
          Learn more than thou trowest,
          Set less than thou throwest;
          Leave thy drink and thy whore,
          And keep in-a-door,
          And thou shalt have more
          Than two tens to a score.
  Kent. This is nothing, fool.
  Fool. Then 'tis like the breath of an unfeed lawyer- you gave me
     nothing for't. Can you make no use of nothing, nuncle?
  Lear. Why, no, boy. Nothing can be made out of nothing.
  Fool. [to Kent] Prithee tell him, so much the rent of his land
     comes to. He will not believe a fool.
  Lear. A bitter fool!
  Fool. Dost thou know the difference, my boy, between a bitter
     fool and a sweet fool?
  Lear. No, lad; teach me.
  Fool.   That lord that counsell'd thee
            To give away thy land,
          Come place him here by me-
            Do thou for him stand.
          The sweet and bitter fool
            Will presently appear;
          The one in motley here,
            The other found out there.
  Lear. Dost thou call me fool, boy?
  Fool. All thy other titles thou hast given away; that thou wast
     born with.
  Kent. This is not altogether fool, my lord.
  Fool. No, faith; lords and great men will not let me. If I had a
     monopoly out, they would have part on't. And ladies too, they
     will not let me have all the fool to myself; they'll be
     snatching. Give me an egg, nuncle, and I'll give thee two
     crowns.
  Lear. What two crowns shall they be?
  Fool. Why, after I have cut the egg i' th' middle and eat up the
     meat, the two crowns of the egg. When thou clovest thy crown i'
     th' middle and gav'st away both parts, thou bor'st thine ass on
     thy back o'er the dirt. Thou hadst little wit in thy bald crown
     when thou gav'st thy golden one away. If I speak like myself in
     this, let him be whipp'd that first finds it so.

     [Sings]    Fools had ne'er less grace in a year,
                  For wise men are grown foppish;
                They know not how their wits to wear,
                  Their manners are so apish.

  Lear. When were you wont to be so full of songs, sirrah?
  Fool. I have us'd it, nuncle, ever since thou mad'st thy daughters
     thy mother; for when thou gav'st them the rod, and put'st down
     thine own breeches,

     [Sings]    Then they for sudden joy did weep,
                  And I for sorrow sung,
                That such a king should play bo-peep
                  And go the fools among.

     Prithee, nuncle, keep a schoolmaster that can teach thy fool to
     lie. I would fain learn to lie.
  Lear. An you lie, sirrah, we'll have you whipp'd.
  Fool. I marvel what kin thou and thy daughters are. They'll have me
     whipp'd for speaking true; thou'lt have me whipp'd for lying;
     and sometimes I am whipp'd for holding my peace. I had rather be
     any kind o' thing than a fool! And yet I would not be thee,
     nuncle. Thou hast pared thy wit o' both sides and left nothing
     i' th' middle. Here comes one o' the parings.

                            Enter Goneril.

  Lear. How now, daughter? What makes that frontlet on? Methinks you
     are too much o' late i' th' frown.
  Fool. Thou wast a pretty fellow when thou hadst no need to care for
     her frowning. Now thou art an O without a figure. I am better
     than thou art now: I am a fool, thou art nothing.
     [To Goneril] Yes, forsooth, I will hold my tongue. So your face
     bids me, though you say nothing. Mum, mum!

            He that keeps nor crust nor crum,
            Weary of all, shall want some.-

     [Points at Lear] That's a sheal'd peascod.
  Gon. Not only, sir, this your all-licens'd fool,
     But other of your insolent retinue
     Do hourly carp and quarrel, breaking forth
     In rank and not-to-be-endured riots. Sir,
     I had thought, by making this well known unto you,
     To have found a safe redress, but now grow fearful,
     By what yourself, too, late have spoke and done,
     That you protect this course, and put it on
     By your allowance; which if you should, the fault
     Would not scape censure, nor the redresses sleep,
     Which, in the tender of a wholesome weal,
     Might in their working do you that offence
     Which else were shame, that then necessity
     Must call discreet proceeding.
  Fool. For you know, nuncle,

          The hedge-sparrow fed the cuckoo so long
          That it had it head bit off by it young.

     So out went the candle, and we were left darkling.
  Lear. Are you our daughter?
  Gon. Come, sir,
     I would you would make use of that good wisdom
     Whereof I know you are fraught, and put away
     These dispositions that of late transform you
     From what you rightly are.
  Fool. May not an ass know when the cart draws the horse?
     Whoop, Jug, I love thee!
  Lear. Doth any here know me? This is not Lear.
     Doth Lear walk thus? speak thus? Where are his eyes?
     Either his notion weakens, his discernings
     Are lethargied- Ha! waking? 'Tis not so!
     Who is it that can tell me who I am?
  Fool. Lear's shadow.
  Lear. I would learn that; for, by the marks of sovereignty,
     Knowledge, and reason, I should be false persuaded
     I had daughters.
  Fool. Which they will make an obedient father.
  Lear. Your name, fair gentlewoman?
  Gon. This admiration, sir, is much o' th' savour
     Of other your new pranks. I do beseech you
     To understand my purposes aright.
     As you are old and reverend, you should be wise.
     Here do you keep a hundred knights and squires;
     Men so disorder'd, so debosh'd, and bold
     That this our court, infected with their manners,
     Shows like a riotous inn. Epicurism and lust
     Make it more like a tavern or a brothel
     Than a grac'd palace. The shame itself doth speak
     For instant remedy. Be then desir'd
     By her that else will take the thing she begs
     A little to disquantity your train,
     And the remainder that shall still depend
     To be such men as may besort your age,
     Which know themselves, and you.
  Lear. Darkness and devils!
     Saddle my horses! Call my train together!
     Degenerate bastard, I'll not trouble thee;
     Yet have I left a daughter.
  Gon. You strike my people, and your disorder'd rabble
     Make servants of their betters.

                            Enter Albany.

  Lear. Woe that too late repents!- O, sir, are you come?
     Is it your will? Speak, sir!- Prepare my horses.
     Ingratitude, thou marble-hearted fiend,
     More hideous when thou show'st thee in a child
     Than the sea-monster!
  Alb. Pray, sir, be patient.
  Lear. [to Goneril] Detested kite, thou liest!
     My train are men of choice and rarest parts,
     That all particulars of duty know
     And in the most exact regard support
     The worships of their name.- O most small fault,
     How ugly didst thou in Cordelia show!
     Which, like an engine, wrench'd my frame of nature
     From the fix'd place; drew from my heart all love
     And added to the gall. O Lear, Lear, Lear!
     Beat at this gate that let thy folly in  [Strikes his head.]
     And thy dear judgment out! Go, go, my people.
  Alb. My lord, I am guiltless, as I am ignorant
     Of what hath mov'd you.
  Lear. It may be so, my lord.
     Hear, Nature, hear! dear goddess, hear!
     Suspend thy purpose, if thou didst intend
     To make this creature fruitful.
     Into her womb convey sterility;
     Dry up in her the organs of increase;
     And from her derogate body never spring
     A babe to honour her! If she must teem,
     Create her child of spleen, that it may live
     And be a thwart disnatur'd torment to her.
     Let it stamp wrinkles in her brow of youth,
     With cadent tears fret channels in her cheeks,
     Turn all her mother's pains and benefits
     To laughter and contempt, that she may feel
     How sharper than a serpent's tooth it is
     To have a thankless child! Away, away!                Exit.
  Alb. Now, gods that we adore, whereof comes this?
  Gon. Never afflict yourself to know the cause;
     But let his disposition have that scope
     That dotage gives it.

                             Enter Lear.

  Lear. What, fifty of my followers at a clap?
     Within a fortnight?
  Alb. What's the matter, sir?
  Lear. I'll tell thee. [To Goneril] Life and death! I am asham'd
     That thou hast power to shake my manhood thus;
     That these hot tears, which break from me perforce,
     Should make thee worth them. Blasts and fogs upon thee!
     Th' untented woundings of a father's curse
     Pierce every sense about thee!- Old fond eyes,
     Beweep this cause again, I'll pluck ye out,
     And cast you, with the waters that you lose,
     To temper clay. Yea, is it come to this?
     Let it be so. Yet have I left a daughter,
     Who I am sure is kind and comfortable.
     When she shall hear this of thee, with her nails
     She'll flay thy wolvish visage. Thou shalt find
     That I'll resume the shape which thou dost think
     I have cast off for ever; thou shalt, I warrant thee.
                            Exeunt [Lear, Kent, and Attendants].
  Gon. Do you mark that, my lord?
  Alb. I cannot be so partial, Goneril,
     To the great love I bear you -
  Gon. Pray you, content.- What, Oswald, ho!
     [To the Fool] You, sir, more knave than fool, after your master!
  Fool. Nuncle Lear, nuncle Lear, tarry! Take the fool with thee.

          A fox when one has caught her,
          And such a daughter,
          Should sure to the slaughter,
          If my cap would buy a halter.
          So the fool follows after.                       Exit.
  Gon. This man hath had good counsel! A hundred knights?
     'Tis politic and safe to let him keep
     At point a hundred knights; yes, that on every dream,
     Each buzz, each fancy, each complaint, dislike,
     He may enguard his dotage with their pow'rs
     And hold our lives in mercy.- Oswald, I say!
  Alb. Well, you may fear too far.
  Gon. Safer than trust too far.
     Let me still take away the harms I fear,
     Not fear still to be taken. I know his heart.
     What he hath utter'd I have writ my sister.
     If she sustain him and his hundred knights,
     When I have show'd th' unfitness-

                     Enter [Oswald the] Steward.

     How now, Oswald?
     What, have you writ that letter to my sister?
  Osw. Yes, madam.
  Gon. Take you some company, and away to horse!
     Inform her full of my particular fear,
     And thereto add such reasons of your own
     As may compact it more. Get you gone,
     And hasten your return. [Exit Oswald.] No, no, my lord!
     This milky gentleness and course of yours,
     Though I condemn it not, yet, under pardon,
     You are much more at task for want of wisdom
     Than prais'd for harmful mildness.
  Alb. How far your eyes may pierce I cannot tell.
     Striving to better, oft we mar what's well.
  Gon. Nay then-
  Alb. Well, well; th' event.                            Exeunt.




Scene V.
Court before the Duke of Albany's Palace.

Enter Lear, Kent, and Fool.

  Lear. Go you before to Gloucester with these letters. Acquaint my
     daughter no further with anything you know than comes from her
     demand out of the letter. If your diligence be not speedy, I
     shall be there afore you.
  Kent. I will not sleep, my lord, till I have delivered your letter.
Exit.
  Fool. If a man's brains were in's heels, were't not in danger of
     kibes?
  Lear. Ay, boy.
  Fool. Then I prithee be merry. Thy wit shall ne'er go slip-shod.
  Lear. Ha, ha, ha!
  Fool. Shalt see thy other daughter will use thee kindly; for though
     she's as like this as a crab's like an apple, yet I can tell
     what I can tell.
  Lear. What canst tell, boy?
  Fool. She'll taste as like this as a crab does to a crab. Thou
     canst tell why one's nose stands i' th' middle on's face?
  Lear. No.
  Fool. Why, to keep one's eyes of either side's nose, that what a
     man cannot smell out, 'a may spy into.
  Lear. I did her wrong.
  Fool. Canst tell how an oyster makes his shell?
  Lear. No.
  Fool. Nor I neither; but I can tell why a snail has a house.
  Lear. Why?
  Fool. Why, to put's head in; not to give it away to his daughters,
     and leave his horns without a case.
  Lear. I will forget my nature. So kind a father!- Be my horses
     ready?
  Fool. Thy asses are gone about 'em. The reason why the seven stars
     are no moe than seven is a pretty reason.
  Lear. Because they are not eight?
  Fool. Yes indeed. Thou wouldst make a good fool.
  Lear. To tak't again perforce! Monster ingratitude!
  Fool. If thou wert my fool, nuncle, I'ld have thee beaten for being
     old before thy time.
  Lear. How's that?
  Fool. Thou shouldst not have been old till thou hadst been wise.
  Lear. O, let me not be mad, not mad, sweet heaven!
     Keep me in temper; I would not be mad!

                         [Enter a Gentleman.]

     How now? Are the horses ready?
  Gent. Ready, my lord.
  Lear. Come, boy.
  Fool. She that's a maid now, and laughs at my departure,
     Shall not be a maid long, unless things be cut shorter
                                                         Exeunt.




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT II. Scene I.
A court within the Castle of the Earl of Gloucester.

Enter [Edmund the] Bastard and Curan, meeting.

  Edm. Save thee, Curan.
  Cur. And you, sir. I have been with your father, and given him
     notice that the Duke of Cornwall and Regan his Duchess will be
     here with him this night.
  Edm. How comes that?
  Cur. Nay, I know not. You have heard of the news abroad- I mean the
     whisper'd ones, for they are yet but ear-kissing arguments?
  Edm. Not I. Pray you, what are they?
  Cur. Have you heard of no likely wars toward 'twixt the two Dukes
     of Cornwall and Albany?
  Edm. Not a word.
  Cur. You may do, then, in time. Fare you well, sir.      Exit.
  Edm. The Duke be here to-night? The better! best!
     This weaves itself perforce into my business.
     My father hath set guard to take my brother;
     And I have one thing, of a queasy question,
     Which I must act. Briefness and fortune, work!
     Brother, a word! Descend! Brother, I say!

                             Enter Edgar.

     My father watches. O sir, fly this place!
     Intelligence is given where you are hid.
     You have now the good advantage of the night.
     Have you not spoken 'gainst the Duke of Cornwall?
     He's coming hither; now, i' th' night, i' th' haste,
     And Regan with him. Have you nothing said
     Upon his party 'gainst the Duke of Albany?
     Advise yourself.
  Edg. I am sure on't, not a word.
  Edm. I hear my father coming. Pardon me!
     In cunning I must draw my sword upon you.
     Draw, seem to defend yourself; now quit you well.-
     Yield! Come before my father. Light, ho, here!
     Fly, brother.- Torches, torches!- So farewell.
                                                     Exit Edgar.
     Some blood drawn on me would beget opinion
     Of my more fierce endeavour. [Stabs his arm.] I have seen
        drunkards
     Do more than this in sport.- Father, father!-
     Stop, stop! No help?

             Enter Gloucester, and Servants with torches.

  Glou. Now, Edmund, where's the villain?
  Edm. Here stood he in the dark, his sharp sword out,
     Mumbling of wicked charms, conjuring the moon
     To stand 's auspicious mistress.
  Glou. But where is he?
  Edm. Look, sir, I bleed.
  Glou. Where is the villain, Edmund?
  Edm. Fled this way, sir. When by no means he could-
  Glou. Pursue him, ho! Go after.        [Exeunt some Servants].
     By no means what?
  Edm. Persuade me to the murther of your lordship;
     But that I told him the revenging gods
     'Gainst parricides did all their thunders bend;
     Spoke with how manifold and strong a bond
     The child was bound to th' father- sir, in fine,
     Seeing how loathly opposite I stood
     To his unnatural purpose, in fell motion
     With his prepared sword he charges home
     My unprovided body, lanch'd mine arm;
     But when he saw my best alarum'd spirits,
     Bold in the quarrel's right, rous'd to th' encounter,
     Or whether gasted by the noise I made,
     Full suddenly he fled.
  Glou. Let him fly far.
     Not in this land shall he remain uncaught;
     And found- dispatch. The noble Duke my master,
     My worthy arch and patron, comes to-night.
     By his authority I will proclaim it
     That he which find, him shall deserve our thanks,
     Bringing the murderous caitiff to the stake;
     He that conceals him, death.
  Edm. When I dissuaded him from his intent
     And found him pight to do it, with curst speech
     I threaten'd to discover him. He replied,
     'Thou unpossessing bastard, dost thou think,
     If I would stand against thee, would the reposal
     Of any trust, virtue, or worth in thee
     Make thy words faith'd? No. What I should deny
     (As this I would; ay, though thou didst produce
     My very character), I'ld turn it all
     To thy suggestion, plot, and damned practice;
     And thou must make a dullard of the world,
     If they not thought the profits of my death
     Were very pregnant and potential spurs
     To make thee seek it.'
  Glou. Strong and fast'ned villain!
     Would he deny his letter? I never got him.
                                                  Tucket within.
     Hark, the Duke's trumpets! I know not why he comes.
     All ports I'll bar; the villain shall not scape;
     The Duke must grant me that. Besides, his picture
     I will send far and near, that all the kingdom
     May have due note of him, and of my land,
     Loyal and natural boy, I'll work the means
     To make thee capable.

                Enter Cornwall, Regan, and Attendants.

  Corn. How now, my noble friend? Since I came hither
     (Which I can call but now) I have heard strange news.
  Reg. If it be true, all vengeance comes too short
     Which can pursue th' offender. How dost, my lord?
  Glou. O madam, my old heart is crack'd, it's crack'd!
  Reg. What, did my father's godson seek your life?
     He whom my father nam'd? Your Edgar?
  Glou. O lady, lady, shame would have it hid!
  Reg. Was he not companion with the riotous knights
     That tend upon my father?
  Glou. I know not, madam. 'Tis too bad, too bad!
  Edm. Yes, madam, he was of that consort.
  Reg. No marvel then though he were ill affected.
     'Tis they have put him on the old man's death,
     To have th' expense and waste of his revenues.
     I have this present evening from my sister
     Been well inform'd of them, and with such cautions
     That, if they come to sojourn at my house,
     I'll not be there.
  Corn. Nor I, assure thee, Regan.
     Edmund, I hear that you have shown your father
     A childlike office.
  Edm. 'Twas my duty, sir.
  Glou. He did bewray his practice, and receiv'd
     This hurt you see, striving to apprehend him.
  Corn. Is he pursued?
  Glou. Ay, my good lord.
  Corn. If he be taken, he shall never more
     Be fear'd of doing harm. Make your own purpose,
     How in my strength you please. For you, Edmund,
     Whose virtue and obedience doth this instant
     So much commend itself, you shall be ours.
     Natures of such deep trust we shall much need;
     You we first seize on.
  Edm. I shall serve you, sir,
     Truly, however else.
  Glou. For him I thank your Grace.
  Corn. You know not why we came to visit you-
  Reg. Thus out of season, threading dark-ey'd night.
     Occasions, noble Gloucester, of some poise,
     Wherein we must have use of your advice.
     Our father he hath writ, so hath our sister,
     Of differences, which I best thought it fit
     To answer from our home. The several messengers
     From hence attend dispatch. Our good old friend,
     Lay comforts to your bosom, and bestow
     Your needful counsel to our business,
     Which craves the instant use.
  Glou. I serve you, madam.
     Your Graces are right welcome.
                                               Exeunt. Flourish.




Scene II.
Before Gloucester's Castle.

Enter Kent and [Oswald the] Steward, severally.

  Osw. Good dawning to thee, friend. Art of this house?
  Kent. Ay.
  Osw. Where may we set our horses?
  Kent. I' th' mire.
  Osw. Prithee, if thou lov'st me, tell me.
  Kent. I love thee not.
  Osw. Why then, I care not for thee.
  Kent. If I had thee in Lipsbury Pinfold, I would make thee care for
     me.
  Osw. Why dost thou use me thus? I know thee not.
  Kent. Fellow, I know thee.
  Osw. What dost thou know me for?
  Kent. A knave; a rascal; an eater of broken meats; a base, proud,
     shallow, beggarly, three-suited, hundred-pound, filthy,
     worsted-stocking knave; a lily-liver'd, action-taking, whoreson,
     glass-gazing, superserviceable, finical rogue;
     one-trunk-inheriting slave; one that wouldst be a bawd in way of
     good service, and art nothing but the composition of a knave,
     beggar, coward, pander, and the son and heir of a mongrel bitch;
     one whom I will beat into clamorous whining, if thou deny the
     least syllable of thy addition.
  Osw. Why, what a monstrous fellow art thou, thus to rail on one
     that's neither known of thee nor knows thee!
  Kent. What a brazen-fac'd varlet art thou, to deny thou knowest me!
     Is it two days ago since I beat thee and tripp'd up thy heels
     before the King? [Draws his sword.] Draw, you rogue! for, though
     it be night, yet the moon shines. I'll make a sop o' th'
     moonshine o' you. Draw, you whoreson cullionly barbermonger!
     draw!
  Osw. Away! I have nothing to do with thee.
  Kent. Draw, you rascal! You come with letters against the King, and
     take Vanity the puppet's part against the royalty of her father.
     Draw, you rogue, or I'll so carbonado your shanks! Draw, you
     rascal! Come your ways!
  Osw. Help, ho! murther! help!
  Kent. Strike, you slave! Stand, rogue! Stand, you neat slave!
     Strike!                                        [Beats him.]
  Osw. Help, ho! murther! murther!

      Enter Edmund, with his rapier drawn, Gloucester, Cornwall,
                           Regan, Servants.

  Edm. How now? What's the matter?                 Parts [them].
  Kent. With you, goodman boy, an you please! Come, I'll flesh ye!
     Come on, young master!
  Glou. Weapons? arms? What's the matter here?
  Corn. Keep peace, upon your lives!
     He dies that strikes again. What is the matter?
  Reg. The messengers from our sister and the King
  Corn. What is your difference? Speak.
  Osw. I am scarce in breath, my lord.
  Kent. No marvel, you have so bestirr'd your valour. You cowardly
     rascal, nature disclaims in thee; a tailor made thee.
  Corn. Thou art a strange fellow. A tailor make a man?
  Kent. Ay, a tailor, sir. A stonecutter or a painter could not have
     made him so ill, though he had been but two hours at the trade.
  Corn. Speak yet, how grew your quarrel?
  Osw. This ancient ruffian, sir, whose life I have spar'd
     At suit of his grey beard-
  Kent. Thou whoreson zed! thou unnecessary letter! My lord, if
     you'll give me leave, I will tread this unbolted villain into
     mortar and daub the walls of a jakes with him. 'Spare my grey
     beard,' you wagtail?
  Corn. Peace, sirrah!
     You beastly knave, know you no reverence?
  Kent. Yes, sir, but anger hath a privilege.
  Corn. Why art thou angry?
  Kent. That such a slave as this should wear a sword,
     Who wears no honesty. Such smiling rogues as these,
     Like rats, oft bite the holy cords atwain
     Which are too intrinse t' unloose; smooth every passion
     That in the natures of their lords rebel,
     Bring oil to fire, snow to their colder moods;
     Renege, affirm, and turn their halcyon beaks
     With every gale and vary of their masters,
     Knowing naught (like dogs) but following.
     A plague upon your epileptic visage!
     Smile you my speeches, as I were a fool?
     Goose, an I had you upon Sarum Plain,
     I'ld drive ye cackling home to Camelot.
  Corn. What, art thou mad, old fellow?
  Glou. How fell you out? Say that.
  Kent. No contraries hold more antipathy
     Than I and such a knave.
  Corn. Why dost thou call him knave? What is his fault?
  Kent. His countenance likes me not.
  Corn. No more perchance does mine, or his, or hers.
  Kent. Sir, 'tis my occupation to be plain.
     I have seen better faces in my time
     Than stands on any shoulder that I see
     Before me at this instant.
  Corn. This is some fellow
     Who, having been prais'd for bluntness, doth affect
     A saucy roughness, and constrains the garb
     Quite from his nature. He cannot flatter, he!
     An honest mind and plain- he must speak truth!
     An they will take it, so; if not, he's plain.
     These kind of knaves I know which in this plainness
     Harbour more craft and more corrupter ends
     Than twenty silly-ducking observants
     That stretch their duties nicely.
  Kent. Sir, in good faith, in sincere verity,
     Under th' allowance of your great aspect,
     Whose influence, like the wreath of radiant fire
     On flickering Phoebus' front-
  Corn. What mean'st by this?
  Kent. To go out of my dialect, which you discommend so much. I
     know, sir, I am no flatterer. He that beguil'd you in a plain
     accent was a plain knave, which, for my part, I will not be,
     though I should win your displeasure to entreat me to't.
  Corn. What was th' offence you gave him?
  Osw. I never gave him any.
     It pleas'd the King his master very late
     To strike at me, upon his misconstruction;
     When he, conjunct, and flattering his displeasure,
     Tripp'd me behind; being down, insulted, rail'd
     And put upon him such a deal of man
     That worthied him, got praises of the King
     For him attempting who was self-subdu'd;
     And, in the fleshment of this dread exploit,
     Drew on me here again.
  Kent. None of these rogues and cowards
     But Ajax is their fool.
  Corn. Fetch forth the stocks!
     You stubborn ancient knave, you reverent braggart,
     We'll teach you-
  Kent. Sir, I am too old to learn.
     Call not your stocks for me. I serve the King;
     On whose employment I was sent to you.
     You shall do small respect, show too bold malice
     Against the grace and person of my master,
     Stocking his messenger.
  Corn. Fetch forth the stocks! As I have life and honour,
     There shall he sit till noon.
  Reg. Till noon? Till night, my lord, and all night too!
  Kent. Why, madam, if I were your father's dog,
     You should not use me so.
  Reg. Sir, being his knave, I will.
  Corn. This is a fellow of the selfsame colour
     Our sister speaks of. Come, bring away the stocks!
                                             Stocks brought out.
  Glou. Let me beseech your Grace not to do so.
     His fault is much, and the good King his master
     Will check him for't. Your purpos'd low correction
     Is such as basest and contemn'dest wretches
     For pilf'rings and most common trespasses
     Are punish'd with. The King must take it ill
     That he, so slightly valued in his messenger,
     Should have him thus restrain'd.
  Corn. I'll answer that.
  Reg. My sister may receive it much more worse,
     To have her gentleman abus'd, assaulted,
     For following her affairs. Put in his legs.-
                                    [Kent is put in the stocks.]
     Come, my good lord, away.
                           Exeunt [all but Gloucester and Kent].
  Glou. I am sorry for thee, friend. 'Tis the Duke's pleasure,
     Whose disposition, all the world well knows,
     Will not be rubb'd nor stopp'd. I'll entreat for thee.
  Kent. Pray do not, sir. I have watch'd and travell'd hard.
     Some time I shall sleep out, the rest I'll whistle.
     A good man's fortune may grow out at heels.
     Give you good morrow!
  Glou. The Duke 's to blame in this; 'twill be ill taken.
Exit.
  Kent. Good King, that must approve the common saw,
     Thou out of heaven's benediction com'st
     To the warm sun!
     Approach, thou beacon to this under globe,
     That by thy comfortable beams I may
     Peruse this letter. Nothing almost sees miracles
     But misery. I know 'tis from Cordelia,
     Who hath most fortunately been inform'd
     Of my obscured course- and [reads] 'shall find time
     From this enormous state, seeking to give
     Losses their remedies'- All weary and o'erwatch'd,
     Take vantage, heavy eyes, not to behold
     This shameful lodging.
     Fortune, good night; smile once more, turn thy wheel.
                                                         Sleeps.




Scene III.
The open country.

Enter Edgar.

  Edg. I heard myself proclaim'd,
     And by the happy hollow of a tree
     Escap'd the hunt. No port is free, no place
     That guard and most unusual vigilance
     Does not attend my taking. Whiles I may scape,
     I will preserve myself; and am bethought
     To take the basest and most poorest shape
     That ever penury, in contempt of man,
     Brought near to beast. My face I'll grime with filth,
     Blanket my loins, elf all my hair in knots,
     And with presented nakedness outface
     The winds and persecutions of the sky.
     The country gives me proof and precedent
     Of Bedlam beggars, who, with roaring voices,
     Strike in their numb'd and mortified bare arms
     Pins, wooden pricks, nails, sprigs of rosemary;
     And with this horrible object, from low farms,
     Poor pelting villages, sheepcotes, and mills,
     Sometime with lunatic bans, sometime with prayers,
     Enforce their charity. 'Poor Turlygod! poor Tom!'
     That's something yet! Edgar I nothing am.             Exit.




Scene IV.
Before Gloucester's Castle; Kent in the stocks.

Enter Lear, Fool, and Gentleman.

  Lear. 'Tis strange that they should so depart from home,
     And not send back my messenger.
  Gent. As I learn'd,
     The night before there was no purpose in them
     Of this remove.
  Kent. Hail to thee, noble master!
  Lear. Ha!
     Mak'st thou this shame thy pastime?
  Kent. No, my lord.
  Fool. Ha, ha! look! he wears cruel garters. Horses are tied by the
     head, dogs and bears by th' neck, monkeys by th' loins, and men
     by th' legs. When a man's over-lusty at legs, then he wears
     wooden nether-stocks.
  Lear. What's he that hath so much thy place mistook
     To set thee here?
  Kent. It is both he and she-
     Your son and daughter.
  Lear. No.
  Kent. Yes.
  Lear. No, I say.
  Kent. I say yea.
  Lear. No, no, they would not!
  Kent. Yes, they have.
  Lear. By Jupiter, I swear no!
  Kent. By Juno, I swear ay!
  Lear. They durst not do't;
     They would not, could not do't. 'Tis worse than murther
     To do upon respect such violent outrage.
     Resolve me with all modest haste which way
     Thou mightst deserve or they impose this usage,
     Coming from us.
  Kent. My lord, when at their home
     I did commend your Highness' letters to them,
     Ere I was risen from the place that show'd
     My duty kneeling, came there a reeking post,
     Stew'd in his haste, half breathless, panting forth
     From Goneril his mistress salutations;
     Deliver'd letters, spite of intermission,
     Which presently they read; on whose contents,
     They summon'd up their meiny, straight took horse,
     Commanded me to follow and attend
     The leisure of their answer, gave me cold looks,
     And meeting here the other messenger,
     Whose welcome I perceiv'd had poison'd mine-
     Being the very fellow which of late
     Display'd so saucily against your Highness-
     Having more man than wit about me, drew.
     He rais'd the house with loud and coward cries.
     Your son and daughter found this trespass worth
     The shame which here it suffers.
  Fool. Winter's not gone yet, if the wild geese fly that way.

          Fathers that wear rags
            Do make their children blind;
          But fathers that bear bags
            Shall see their children kind.
          Fortune, that arrant whore,
          Ne'er turns the key to th' poor.

     But for all this, thou shalt have as many dolours for thy
     daughters as thou canst tell in a year.
  Lear. O, how this mother swells up toward my heart!
     Hysterica passio! Down, thou climbing sorrow!
     Thy element's below! Where is this daughter?
  Kent. With the Earl, sir, here within.
  Lear. Follow me not;
     Stay here.                                            Exit.
  Gent. Made you no more offence but what you speak of?
  Kent. None.
     How chance the King comes with so small a number?
  Fool. An thou hadst been set i' th' stocks for that question,
     thou'dst well deserv'd it.
  Kent. Why, fool?
  Fool. We'll set thee to school to an ant, to teach thee there's no
     labouring i' th' winter. All that follow their noses are led by
     their eyes but blind men, and there's not a nose among twenty
     but can smell him that's stinking. Let go thy hold when a great
     wheel runs down a hill, lest it break thy neck with following
     it; but the great one that goes upward, let him draw thee after.
     When a wise man gives thee better counsel, give me mine again. I
     would have none but knaves follow it, since a fool gives it.
          That sir which serves and seeks for gain,
            And follows but for form,
          Will pack when it begins to rain
            And leave thee in the storm.
          But I will tarry; the fool will stay,
            And let the wise man fly.
          The knave turns fool that runs away;
            The fool no knave, perdy.
  Kent. Where learn'd you this, fool?
  Fool. Not i' th' stocks, fool.

                      Enter Lear and Gloucester

  Lear. Deny to speak with me? They are sick? they are weary?
     They have travell'd all the night? Mere fetches-
     The images of revolt and flying off!
     Fetch me a better answer.
  Glou. My dear lord,
     You know the fiery quality of the Duke,
     How unremovable and fix'd he is
     In his own course.
  Lear. Vengeance! plague! death! confusion!
     Fiery? What quality? Why, Gloucester, Gloucester,
     I'ld speak with the Duke of Cornwall and his wife.
  Glou. Well, my good lord, I have inform'd them so.
  Lear. Inform'd them? Dost thou understand me, man?
  Glou. Ay, my good lord.
  Lear. The King would speak with Cornwall; the dear father
     Would with his daughter speak, commands her service.
     Are they inform'd of this? My breath and blood!
     Fiery? the fiery Duke? Tell the hot Duke that-
     No, but not yet! May be he is not well.
     Infirmity doth still neglect all office
     Whereto our health is bound. We are not ourselves
     When nature, being oppress'd, commands the mind
     To suffer with the body. I'll forbear;
     And am fallen out with my more headier will,
     To take the indispos'd and sickly fit
     For the sound man.- Death on my state! Wherefore
     Should be sit here? This act persuades me
     That this remotion of the Duke and her
     Is practice only. Give me my servant forth.
     Go tell the Duke and 's wife I'ld speak with them-
     Now, presently. Bid them come forth and hear me,
     Or at their chamber door I'll beat the drum
     Till it cry sleep to death.
  Glou. I would have all well betwixt you.                 Exit.
  Lear. O me, my heart, my rising heart! But down!
  Fool. Cry to it, nuncle, as the cockney did to the eels when she
     put 'em i' th' paste alive. She knapp'd 'em o' th' coxcombs with
     a stick and cried 'Down, wantons, down!' 'Twas her brother that,
     in pure kindness to his horse, buttered his hay.

             Enter Cornwall, Regan, Gloucester, Servants.

  Lear. Good morrow to you both.
  Corn. Hail to your Grace!
                                       Kent here set at liberty.
  Reg. I am glad to see your Highness.
  Lear. Regan, I think you are; I know what reason
     I have to think so. If thou shouldst not be glad,
     I would divorce me from thy mother's tomb,
     Sepulchring an adultress. [To Kent] O, are you free?
     Some other time for that.- Beloved Regan,
     Thy sister's naught. O Regan, she hath tied
     Sharp-tooth'd unkindness, like a vulture, here!
                                   [Lays his hand on his heart.]
     I can scarce speak to thee. Thou'lt not believe
     With how deprav'd a quality- O Regan!
  Reg. I pray you, sir, take patience. I have hope
     You less know how to value her desert
     Than she to scant her duty.
  Lear. Say, how is that?
  Reg. I cannot think my sister in the least
     Would fail her obligation. If, sir, perchance
     She have restrain'd the riots of your followers,
     'Tis on such ground, and to such wholesome end,
     As clears her from all blame.
  Lear. My curses on her!
  Reg. O, sir, you are old!
     Nature in you stands on the very verge
     Of her confine. You should be rul'd, and led
     By some discretion that discerns your state
     Better than you yourself. Therefore I pray you
     That to our sister you do make return;
     Say you have wrong'd her, sir.
  Lear. Ask her forgiveness?
     Do you but mark how this becomes the house:
     'Dear daughter, I confess that I am old.          [Kneels.]
     Age is unnecessary. On my knees I beg
     That you'll vouchsafe me raiment, bed, and food.'
  Reg. Good sir, no more! These are unsightly tricks.
     Return you to my sister.
  Lear. [rises] Never, Regan!
     She hath abated me of half my train;
     Look'd black upon me; struck me with her tongue,
     Most serpent-like, upon the very heart.
     All the stor'd vengeances of heaven fall
     On her ingrateful top! Strike her young bones,
     You taking airs, with lameness!
  Corn. Fie, sir, fie!
  Lear. You nimble lightnings, dart your blinding flames
     Into her scornful eyes! Infect her beauty,
     You fen-suck'd fogs, drawn by the pow'rful sun,
     To fall and blast her pride!
  Reg. O the blest gods! so will you wish on me
     When the rash mood is on.
  Lear. No, Regan, thou shalt never have my curse.
     Thy tender-hefted nature shall not give
     Thee o'er to harshness. Her eyes are fierce; but thine
     Do comfort, and not burn. 'Tis not in thee
     To grudge my pleasures, to cut off my train,
     To bandy hasty words, to scant my sizes,
     And, in conclusion, to oppose the bolt
     Against my coming in. Thou better know'st
     The offices of nature, bond of childhood,
     Effects of courtesy, dues of gratitude.
     Thy half o' th' kingdom hast thou not forgot,
     Wherein I thee endow'd.
  Reg. Good sir, to th' purpose.
                                                  Tucket within.
  Lear. Who put my man i' th' stocks?
  Corn. What trumpet's that?
  Reg. I know't- my sister's. This approves her letter,
     That she would soon be here.

                     Enter [Oswald the] Steward.

     Is your lady come?
  Lear. This is a slave, whose easy-borrowed pride
     Dwells in the fickle grace of her he follows.
     Out, varlet, from my sight!
  Corn. What means your Grace?

                            Enter Goneril.

  Lear. Who stock'd my servant? Regan, I have good hope
     Thou didst not know on't.- Who comes here? O heavens!
     If you do love old men, if your sweet sway
     Allow obedience- if yourselves are old,
     Make it your cause! Send down, and take my part!
     [To Goneril] Art not asham'd to look upon this beard?-
     O Regan, wilt thou take her by the hand?
  Gon. Why not by th' hand, sir? How have I offended?
     All's not offence that indiscretion finds
     And dotage terms so.
  Lear. O sides, you are too tough!
     Will you yet hold? How came my man i' th' stocks?
  Corn. I set him there, sir; but his own disorders
     Deserv'd much less advancement.
  Lear. You? Did you?
  Reg. I pray you, father, being weak, seem so.
     If, till the expiration of your month,
     You will return and sojourn with my sister,
     Dismissing half your train, come then to me.
     I am now from home, and out of that provision
     Which shall be needful for your entertainment.
  Lear. Return to her, and fifty men dismiss'd?
     No, rather I abjure all roofs, and choose
     To wage against the enmity o' th' air,
     To be a comrade with the wolf and owl-
     Necessity's sharp pinch! Return with her?
     Why, the hot-blooded France, that dowerless took
     Our youngest born, I could as well be brought
     To knee his throne, and, squire-like, pension beg
     To keep base life afoot. Return with her?
     Persuade me rather to be slave and sumpter
     To this detested groom.                 [Points at Oswald.]
  Gon. At your choice, sir.
  Lear. I prithee, daughter, do not make me mad.
     I will not trouble thee, my child; farewell.
     We'll no more meet, no more see one another.
     But yet thou art my flesh, my blood, my daughter;
     Or rather a disease that's in my flesh,
     Which I must needs call mine. Thou art a boil,
     A plague sore, an embossed carbuncle
     In my corrupted blood. But I'll not chide thee.
     Let shame come when it will, I do not call it.
     I do not bid the Thunder-bearer shoot
     Nor tell tales of thee to high-judging Jove.
     Mend when thou canst; be better at thy leisure;
     I can be patient, I can stay with Regan,
     I and my hundred knights.
  Reg. Not altogether so.
     I look'd not for you yet, nor am provided
     For your fit welcome. Give ear, sir, to my sister;
     For those that mingle reason with your passion
     Must be content to think you old, and so-
     But she knows what she does.
  Lear. Is this well spoken?
  Reg. I dare avouch it, sir. What, fifty followers?
     Is it not well? What should you need of more?
     Yea, or so many, sith that both charge and danger
     Speak 'gainst so great a number? How in one house
     Should many people, under two commands,
     Hold amity? 'Tis hard; almost impossible.
  Gon. Why might not you, my lord, receive attendance
     From those that she calls servants, or from mine?
  Reg. Why not, my lord? If then they chanc'd to slack ye,
     We could control them. If you will come to me
     (For now I spy a danger), I entreat you
     To bring but five-and-twenty. To no more
     Will I give place or notice.
  Lear. I gave you all-
  Reg. And in good time you gave it!
  Lear. Made you my guardians, my depositaries;
     But kept a reservation to be followed
     With such a number. What, must I come to you
     With five-and-twenty, Regan? Said you so?
  Reg. And speak't again my lord. No more with me.
  Lear. Those wicked creatures yet do look well-favour'd
     When others are more wicked; not being the worst
     Stands in some rank of praise. [To Goneril] I'll go with thee.
     Thy fifty yet doth double five-and-twenty,
     And thou art twice her love.
  Gon. Hear, me, my lord.
     What need you five-and-twenty, ten, or five,
     To follow in a house where twice so many
     Have a command to tend you?
  Reg. What need one?
  Lear. O, reason not the need! Our basest beggars
     Are in the poorest thing superfluous.
     Allow not nature more than nature needs,
     Man's life is cheap as beast's. Thou art a lady:
     If only to go warm were gorgeous,
     Why, nature needs not what thou gorgeous wear'st
     Which scarcely keeps thee warm. But, for true need-
     You heavens, give me that patience, patience I need!
     You see me here, you gods, a poor old man,
     As full of grief as age; wretched in both.
     If it be you that stirs these daughters' hearts
     Against their father, fool me not so much
     To bear it tamely; touch me with noble anger,
     And let not women's weapons, water drops,
     Stain my man's cheeks! No, you unnatural hags!
     I will have such revenges on you both
     That all the world shall- I will do such things-
     What they are yet, I know not; but they shall be
     The terrors of the earth! You think I'll weep.
     No, I'll not weep.
     I have full cause of weeping, but this heart
     Shall break into a hundred thousand flaws
     Or ere I'll weep. O fool, I shall go mad!
              Exeunt Lear, Gloucester, Kent, and Fool. Storm and
                                                        tempest.
  Corn. Let us withdraw; 'twill be a storm.
  Reg. This house is little; the old man and 's people
     Cannot be well bestow'd.
  Gon. 'Tis his own blame; hath put himself from rest
     And must needs taste his folly.
  Reg. For his particular, I'll receive him gladly,
     But not one follower.
  Gon. So am I purpos'd.
     Where is my Lord of Gloucester?
  Corn. Followed the old man forth.

                          Enter Gloucester.

     He is return'd.
  Glou. The King is in high rage.
  Corn. Whither is he going?
  Glou. He calls to horse, but will I know not whither.
  Corn. 'Tis best to give him way; he leads himself.
  Gon. My lord, entreat him by no means to stay.
  Glou. Alack, the night comes on, and the bleak winds
     Do sorely ruffle. For many miles about
     There's scarce a bush.
  Reg. O, sir, to wilful men
     The injuries that they themselves procure
     Must be their schoolmasters. Shut up your doors.
     He is attended with a desperate train,
     And what they may incense him to, being apt
     To have his ear abus'd, wisdom bids fear.
  Corn. Shut up your doors, my lord: 'tis a wild night.
     My Regan counsels well. Come out o' th' storm.        [Exeunt.]




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT III. Scene I.
A heath.

Storm still. Enter Kent and a Gentleman at several doors.

  Kent. Who's there, besides foul weather?
  Gent. One minded like the weather, most unquietly.
  Kent. I know you. Where's the King?
  Gent. Contending with the fretful elements;
     Bids the wind blow the earth into the sea,
     Or swell the curled waters 'bove the main,
     That things might change or cease; tears his white hair,
     Which the impetuous blasts, with eyeless rage,
     Catch in their fury and make nothing of;
     Strives in his little world of man to outscorn
     The to-and-fro-conflicting wind and rain.
     This night, wherein the cub-drawn bear would couch,
     The lion and the belly-pinched wolf
     Keep their fur dry, unbonneted he runs,
     And bids what will take all.
  Kent. But who is with him?
  Gent. None but the fool, who labours to outjest
     His heart-struck injuries.
  Kent. Sir, I do know you,
     And dare upon the warrant of my note
     Commend a dear thing to you. There is division
     (Although as yet the face of it be cover'd
     With mutual cunning) 'twixt Albany and Cornwall;
     Who have (as who have not, that their great stars
     Thron'd and set high?) servants, who seem no less,
     Which are to France the spies and speculations
     Intelligent of our state. What hath been seen,
     Either in snuffs and packings of the Dukes,
     Or the hard rein which both of them have borne
     Against the old kind King, or something deeper,
     Whereof, perchance, these are but furnishings-
     But, true it is, from France there comes a power
     Into this scattered kingdom, who already,
     Wise in our negligence, have secret feet
     In some of our best ports and are at point
     To show their open banner. Now to you:
     If on my credit you dare build so far
     To make your speed to Dover, you shall find
     Some that will thank you, making just report
     Of how unnatural and bemadding sorrow
     The King hath cause to plain.
     I am a gentleman of blood and breeding,
     And from some knowledge and assurance offer
     This office to you.
  Gent. I will talk further with you.
  Kent. No, do not.
     For confirmation that I am much more
     Than my out-wall, open this purse and take
     What it contains. If you shall see Cordelia
     (As fear not but you shall), show her this ring,
     And she will tell you who your fellow is
     That yet you do not know. Fie on this storm!
     I will go seek the King.
  Gent. Give me your hand. Have you no more to say?
  Kent. Few words, but, to effect, more than all yet:
     That, when we have found the King (in which your pain
     That way, I'll this), he that first lights on him
     Holla the other.
                                             Exeunt [severally].




Scene II.
Another part of the heath.

Storm still. Enter Lear and Fool.

  Lear. Blow, winds, and crack your cheeks! rage! blow!
     You cataracts and hurricanoes, spout
     Till you have drench'd our steeples, drown'd the cocks!
     You sulph'rous and thought-executing fires,
     Vaunt-couriers to oak-cleaving thunderbolts,
     Singe my white head! And thou, all-shaking thunder,
     Strike flat the thick rotundity o' th' world,
     Crack Nature's moulds, all germains spill at once,
     That makes ingrateful man!
  Fool. O nuncle, court holy water in a dry house is better than this
     rain water out o' door. Good nuncle, in, and ask thy daughters
     blessing! Here's a night pities nether wise men nor fools.
  Lear. Rumble thy bellyful! Spit, fire! spout, rain!
     Nor rain, wind, thunder, fire are my daughters.
     I tax not you, you elements, with unkindness.
     I never gave you kingdom, call'd you children,
     You owe me no subscription. Then let fall
     Your horrible pleasure. Here I stand your slave,
     A poor, infirm, weak, and despis'd old man.
     But yet I call you servile ministers,
     That will with two pernicious daughters join
     Your high-engender'd battles 'gainst a head
     So old and white as this! O! O! 'tis foul!
  Fool. He that has a house to put 's head in has a good head-piece.
          The codpiece that will house
            Before the head has any,
          The head and he shall louse:
            So beggars marry many.
          The man that makes his toe
            What he his heart should make
          Shall of a corn cry woe,
            And turn his sleep to wake.
     For there was never yet fair woman but she made mouths in a
     glass.

                             Enter Kent.

  Lear. No, I will be the pattern of all patience;
     I will say nothing.
  Kent. Who's there?
  Fool. Marry, here's grace and a codpiece; that's a wise man and a
     fool.
  Kent. Alas, sir, are you here? Things that love night
     Love not such nights as these. The wrathful skies
     Gallow the very wanderers of the dark
     And make them keep their caves. Since I was man,
     Such sheets of fire, such bursts of horrid thunder,
     Such groans of roaring wind and rain, I never
     Remember to have heard. Man's nature cannot carry
     Th' affliction nor the fear.
  Lear. Let the great gods,
     That keep this dreadful pudder o'er our heads,
     Find out their enemies now. Tremble, thou wretch,
     That hast within thee undivulged crimes
     Unwhipp'd of justice. Hide thee, thou bloody hand;
     Thou perjur'd, and thou simular man of virtue
     That art incestuous. Caitiff, in pieces shake
     That under covert and convenient seeming
     Hast practis'd on man's life. Close pent-up guilts,
     Rive your concealing continents, and cry
     These dreadful summoners grace. I am a man
     More sinn'd against than sinning.
  Kent. Alack, bareheaded?
     Gracious my lord, hard by here is a hovel;
     Some friendship will it lend you 'gainst the tempest.
     Repose you there, whilst I to this hard house
     (More harder than the stones whereof 'tis rais'd,
     Which even but now, demanding after you,
     Denied me to come in) return, and force
     Their scanted courtesy.
  Lear. My wits begin to turn.
     Come on, my boy. How dost, my boy? Art cold?
     I am cold myself. Where is this straw, my fellow?
     The art of our necessities is strange,
     That can make vile things precious. Come, your hovel.
     Poor fool and knave, I have one part in my heart
     That's sorry yet for thee.
  Fool. [sings]

          He that has and a little tiny wit-
            With hey, ho, the wind and the rain-
          Must make content with his fortunes fit,
             For the rain it raineth every day.

  Lear. True, my good boy. Come, bring us to this hovel.
                                         Exeunt [Lear and Kent].
  Fool. This is a brave night to cool a courtesan. I'll speak a
     prophecy ere I go:
          When priests are more in word than matter;
          When brewers mar their malt with water;
          When nobles are their tailors' tutors,
          No heretics burn'd, but wenches' suitors;
          When every case in law is right,
          No squire in debt nor no poor knight;
          When slanders do not live in tongues,
          Nor cutpurses come not to throngs;
          When usurers tell their gold i' th' field,
          And bawds and whores do churches build:
          Then shall the realm of Albion
          Come to great confusion.
          Then comes the time, who lives to see't,
          That going shall be us'd with feet.
     This prophecy Merlin shall make, for I live before his time.
Exit.




Scene III.
Gloucester's Castle.

Enter Gloucester and Edmund.

  Glou. Alack, alack, Edmund, I like not this unnatural dealing! When
     I desir'd their leave that I might pity him, they took from me
     the use of mine own house, charg'd me on pain of perpetual
     displeasure neither to speak of him, entreat for him, nor any
     way sustain him.
  Edm. Most savage and unnatural!
  Glou. Go to; say you nothing. There is division betwixt the Dukes,
     and a worse matter than that. I have received a letter this
     night- 'tis dangerous to be spoken- I have lock'd the letter in
     my closet. These injuries the King now bears will be revenged
     home; there's part of a power already footed; we must incline to
     the King. I will seek him and privily relieve him. Go you and
     maintain talk with the Duke, that my charity be not of him
     perceived. If he ask for me, I am ill and gone to bed. Though I
     die for't, as no less is threat'ned me, the King my old master
     must be relieved. There is some strange thing toward, Edmund.
     Pray you be careful.                                  Exit.
  Edm. This courtesy, forbid thee, shall the Duke
     Instantly know, and of that letter too.
     This seems a fair deserving, and must draw me
     That which my father loses- no less than all.
     The younger rises when the old doth fall.             Exit.




Scene IV.
The heath. Before a hovel.

Storm still. Enter Lear, Kent, and Fool.

  Kent. Here is the place, my lord. Good my lord, enter.
     The tyranny of the open night 's too rough
     For nature to endure.
  Lear. Let me alone.
  Kent. Good my lord, enter here.
  Lear. Wilt break my heart?
  Kent. I had rather break mine own. Good my lord, enter.
  Lear. Thou think'st 'tis much that this contentious storm
     Invades us to the skin. So 'tis to thee;
     But where the greater malady is fix'd,
     The lesser is scarce felt. Thou'dst shun a bear;
     But if thy flight lay toward the raging sea,
     Thou'dst meet the bear i' th' mouth. When the mind's free,
     The body's delicate. The tempest in my mind
     Doth from my senses take all feeling else
     Save what beats there. Filial ingratitude!
     Is it not as this mouth should tear this hand
     For lifting food to't? But I will punish home!
     No, I will weep no more. In such a night
     'To shut me out! Pour on; I will endure.
     In such a night as this! O Regan, Goneril!
     Your old kind father, whose frank heart gave all!
     O, that way madness lies; let me shun that!
     No more of that.
  Kent. Good my lord, enter here.
  Lear. Prithee go in thyself; seek thine own ease.
     This tempest will not give me leave to ponder
     On things would hurt me more. But I'll go in.
     [To the Fool] In, boy; go first.- You houseless poverty-
     Nay, get thee in. I'll pray, and then I'll sleep.
                                                    Exit [Fool].
     Poor naked wretches, wheresoe'er you are,
     That bide the pelting of this pitiless storm,
     How shall your houseless heads and unfed sides,
     Your loop'd and window'd raggedness, defend you
     From seasons such as these? O, I have ta'en
     Too little care of this! Take physic, pomp;
     Expose thyself to feel what wretches feel,
     That thou mayst shake the superflux to them
     And show the heavens more just.
  Edg. [within] Fathom and half, fathom and half! Poor Tom!

                     Enter Fool [from the hovel].

  Fool. Come not in here, nuncle, here's a spirit. Help me, help me!
  Kent. Give me thy hand. Who's there?
  Fool. A spirit, a spirit! He says his name's poor Tom.
  Kent. What art thou that dost grumble there i' th' straw?
     Come forth.

                 Enter Edgar [disguised as a madman].

  Edg. Away! the foul fiend follows me! Through the sharp hawthorn
     blows the cold wind. Humh! go to thy cold bed, and warm thee.
  Lear. Hast thou given all to thy two daughters, and art thou come
     to this?
  Edg. Who gives anything to poor Tom? whom the foul fiend hath led
     through fire and through flame, through ford and whirlpool, o'er
     bog and quagmire; that hath laid knives under his pillow and
     halters in his pew, set ratsbane by his porridge, made him proud
     of heart, to ride on a bay trotting horse over four-inch'd
     bridges, to course his own shadow for a traitor. Bless thy five
     wits! Tom 's acold. O, do de, do de, do de. Bless thee from
     whirlwinds, star-blasting, and taking! Do poor Tom some charity,
     whom the foul fiend vexes. There could I have him now- and there-
     and there again- and there!
                                                    Storm still.
  Lear. What, have his daughters brought him to this pass?
     Couldst thou save nothing? Didst thou give 'em all?
  Fool. Nay, he reserv'd a blanket, else we had been all sham'd.
  Lear. Now all the plagues that in the pendulous air
     Hang fated o'er men's faults light on thy daughters!
  Kent. He hath no daughters, sir.
  Lear. Death, traitor! nothing could have subdu'd nature
     To such a lowness but his unkind daughters.
     Is it the fashion that discarded fathers
     Should have thus little mercy on their flesh?
     Judicious punishment! 'Twas this flesh begot
     Those pelican daughters.
  Edg. Pillicock sat on Pillicock's Hill. 'Allow, 'allow, loo, loo!
  Fool. This cold night will turn us all to fools and madmen.
  Edg. Take heed o' th' foul fiend; obey thy parents: keep thy word
     justly; swear not; commit not with man's sworn spouse; set not
     thy sweet heart on proud array. Tom 's acold.
  Lear. What hast thou been?
  Edg. A servingman, proud in heart and mind; that curl'd my hair,
     wore gloves in my cap; serv'd the lust of my mistress' heart and
     did the act of darkness with her; swore as many oaths as I spake
     words, and broke them in the sweet face of heaven; one that
     slept in the contriving of lust, and wak'd to do it. Wine lov'd
     I deeply, dice dearly; and in woman out-paramour'd the Turk.
     False of heart, light of ear, bloody of hand; hog in sloth, fox
     in stealth, wolf in greediness, dog in madness, lion in prey.
     Let not the creaking of shoes nor the rustling of silks betray
     thy poor heart to woman. Keep thy foot out of brothel, thy hand
     out of placket, thy pen from lender's book, and defy the foul
     fiend. Still through the hawthorn blows the cold wind; says
     suum, mun, hey, no, nonny. Dolphin my boy, my boy, sessa! let
     him trot by.
                                                    Storm still.
  Lear. Why, thou wert better in thy grave than to answer with thy
     uncover'd body this extremity of the skies. Is man no more than
     this? Consider him well. Thou ow'st the worm no silk, the beast
     no hide, the sheep no wool, the cat no perfume. Ha! Here's three
     on's are sophisticated! Thou art the thing itself;
     unaccommodated man is no more but such a poor, bare, forked
     animal as thou art. Off, off, you lendings! Come, unbutton
     here.
                                         [Tears at his clothes.]
  Fool. Prithee, nuncle, be contented! 'Tis a naughty night to swim
     in. Now a little fire in a wild field were like an old lecher's
     heart- a small spark, all the rest on's body cold. Look, here
     comes a walking fire.

                    Enter Gloucester with a torch.

  Edg. This is the foul fiend Flibbertigibbet. He begins at curfew,
     and walks till the first cock. He gives the web and the pin,
     squints the eye, and makes the harelip; mildews the white wheat,
     and hurts the poor creature of earth.

           Saint Withold footed thrice the 'old;
           He met the nightmare, and her nine fold;
              Bid her alight
              And her troth plight,
           And aroint thee, witch, aroint thee!

  Kent. How fares your Grace?
  Lear. What's he?
  Kent. Who's there? What is't you seek?
  Glou. What are you there? Your names?
  Edg. Poor Tom, that eats the swimming frog, the toad, the todpole,
     the wall-newt and the water; that in the fury of his heart, when
     the foul fiend rages, eats cow-dung for sallets, swallows the
     old rat and the ditch-dog, drinks the green mantle of the
     standing pool; who is whipp'd from tithing to tithing, and
     stock-punish'd and imprison'd; who hath had three suits to his
     back, six shirts to his body, horse to ride, and weapons to
     wear;

          But mice and rats, and such small deer,
          Have been Tom's food for seven long year.

     Beware my follower. Peace, Smulkin! peace, thou fiend!
  Glou. What, hath your Grace no better company?
  Edg. The prince of darkness is a gentleman!
     Modo he's call'd, and Mahu.
  Glou. Our flesh and blood is grown so vile, my lord,
     That it doth hate what gets it.
  Edg. Poor Tom 's acold.
  Glou. Go in with me. My duty cannot suffer
     T' obey in all your daughters' hard commands.
     Though their injunction be to bar my doors
     And let this tyrannous night take hold upon you,
     Yet have I ventur'd to come seek you out
     And bring you where both fire and food is ready.
  Lear. First let me talk with this philosopher.
     What is the cause of thunder?
  Kent. Good my lord, take his offer; go into th' house.
  Lear. I'll talk a word with this same learned Theban.
     What is your study?
  Edg. How to prevent the fiend and to kill vermin.
  Lear. Let me ask you one word in private.
  Kent. Importune him once more to go, my lord.
     His wits begin t' unsettle.
  Glou. Canst thou blame him?
                                                    Storm still.
     His daughters seek his death. Ah, that good Kent!
     He said it would be thus- poor banish'd man!
     Thou say'st the King grows mad: I'll tell thee, friend,
     I am almost mad myself. I had a son,
     Now outlaw'd from my blood. He sought my life
     But lately, very late. I lov'd him, friend-
     No father his son dearer. True to tell thee,
     The grief hath craz'd my wits. What a night 's this!
     I do beseech your Grace-
  Lear. O, cry you mercy, sir.
     Noble philosopher, your company.
  Edg. Tom's acold.
  Glou. In, fellow, there, into th' hovel; keep thee warm.
  Lear. Come, let's in all.
  Kent. This way, my lord.
  Lear. With him!
     I will keep still with my philosopher.
  Kent. Good my lord, soothe him; let him take the fellow.
  Glou. Take him you on.
  Kent. Sirrah, come on; go along with us.
  Lear. Come, good Athenian.
  Glou. No words, no words! hush.
  Edg. Child Rowland to the dark tower came;
     His word was still

          Fie, foh, and fum!
          I smell the blood of a British man.
                                                         Exeunt.

Scene V.
Gloucester's Castle.

Enter Cornwall and Edmund.

  Corn. I will have my revenge ere I depart his house.
  Edm. How, my lord, I may be censured, that nature thus gives way to
     loyalty, something fears me to think of.
  Corn. I now perceive it was not altogether your brother's evil
     disposition made him seek his death; but a provoking merit, set
     awork by a reproveable badness in himself.
  Edm. How malicious is my fortune that I must repent to be just!
     This is the letter he spoke of, which approves him an
     intelligent party to the advantages of France. O heavens! that
     this treason were not- or not I the detector!
  Corn. Go with me to the Duchess.
  Edm. If the matter of this paper be certain, you have mighty
     business in hand.
  Corn. True or false, it hath made thee Earl of Gloucester.
     Seek out where thy father is, that he may be ready for our
     apprehension.
  Edm. [aside] If I find him comforting the King, it will stuff his
     suspicion more fully.- I will persever in my course of loyalty,
     though the conflict be sore between that and my blood.
  Corn. I will lay trust upon thee, and thou shalt find a dearer
     father in my love.
                                                         Exeunt.




Scene VI.
A farmhouse near Gloucester's Castle.

Enter Gloucester, Lear, Kent, Fool, and Edgar.

  Glou. Here is better than the open air; take it thankfully. I will
     piece out the comfort with what addition I can. I will not be
     long from you.
  Kent. All the power of his wits have given way to his impatience.
     The gods reward your kindness!
                                              Exit [Gloucester].
  Edg. Frateretto calls me, and tells me Nero is an angler in the
     lake of darkness. Pray, innocent, and beware the foul fiend.
  Fool. Prithee, nuncle, tell me whether a madman be a gentleman or a
     yeoman.
  Lear. A king, a king!
  Fool. No, he's a yeoman that has a gentleman to his son; for he's a
     mad yeoman that sees his son a gentleman before him.
  Lear. To have a thousand with red burning spits
     Come hizzing in upon 'em-
  Edg. The foul fiend bites my back.
  Fool. He's mad that trusts in the tameness of a wolf, a horse's
     health, a boy's love, or a whore's oath.
  Lear. It shall be done; I will arraign them straight.
     [To Edgar] Come, sit thou here, most learned justicer.
     [To the Fool] Thou, sapient sir, sit here. Now, you she-foxes!
  Edg. Look, where he stands and glares! Want'st thou eyes at trial,
     madam?

             Come o'er the bourn, Bessy, to me.

  Fool.      Her boat hath a leak,
             And she must not speak
           Why she dares not come over to thee.

  Edg. The foul fiend haunts poor Tom in the voice of a nightingale.
     Hoppedance cries in Tom's belly for two white herring. Croak
     not, black angel; I have no food for thee.
  Kent. How do you, sir? Stand you not so amaz'd.
     Will you lie down and rest upon the cushions?
  Lear. I'll see their trial first. Bring in their evidence.
     [To Edgar] Thou, robed man of justice, take thy place.
     [To the Fool] And thou, his yokefellow of equity,
     Bench by his side. [To Kent] You are o' th' commission,
     Sit you too.
  Edg. Let us deal justly.

          Sleepest or wakest thou, jolly shepherd?
            Thy sheep be in the corn;
          And for one blast of thy minikin mouth
            Thy sheep shall take no harm.

     Purr! the cat is gray.
  Lear. Arraign her first. 'Tis Goneril. I here take my oath before
     this honourable assembly, she kicked the poor King her father.
  Fool. Come hither, mistress. Is your name Goneril?
  Lear. She cannot deny it.
  Fool. Cry you mercy, I took you for a joint-stool.
  Lear. And here's another, whose warp'd looks proclaim
     What store her heart is made on. Stop her there!
     Arms, arms! sword! fire! Corruption in the place!
     False justicer, why hast thou let her scape?
  Edg. Bless thy five wits!
  Kent. O pity! Sir, where is the patience now
     That you so oft have boasted to retain?
  Edg. [aside] My tears begin to take his part so much
     They'll mar my counterfeiting.
  Lear. The little dogs and all,
     Tray, Blanch, and Sweetheart, see, they bark at me.
  Edg. Tom will throw his head at them. Avaunt, you curs!
           Be thy mouth or black or white,
           Tooth that poisons if it bite;
           Mastiff, greyhound, mongrel grim,
           Hound or spaniel, brach or lym,
           Bobtail tyke or trundle-tall-
           Tom will make them weep and wail;
           For, with throwing thus my head,
           Dogs leap the hatch, and all are fled.
     Do de, de, de. Sessa! Come, march to wakes and fairs and market
     towns. Poor Tom, thy horn is dry.
  Lear. Then let them anatomize Regan. See what breeds about her
     heart. Is there any cause in nature that makes these hard
     hearts? [To Edgar] You, sir- I entertain you for one of my
     hundred; only I do not like the fashion of your garments. You'll
     say they are Persian attire; but let them be chang'd.
  Kent. Now, good my lord, lie here and rest awhile.
  Lear. Make no noise, make no noise; draw the curtains.
     So, so, so. We'll go to supper i' th' morning. So, so, so.
  Fool. And I'll go to bed at noon.

                          Enter Gloucester.

  Glou. Come hither, friend. Where is the King my master?
  Kent. Here, sir; but trouble him not; his wits are gone.
  Glou. Good friend, I prithee take him in thy arms.
     I have o'erheard a plot of death upon him.
     There is a litter ready; lay him in't
     And drive towards Dover, friend, where thou shalt meet
     Both welcome and protection. Take up thy master.
     If thou shouldst dally half an hour, his life,
     With thine, and all that offer to defend him,
     Stand in assured loss. Take up, take up!
     And follow me, that will to some provision
     Give thee quick conduct.
  Kent. Oppressed nature sleeps.
     This rest might yet have balm'd thy broken senses,
     Which, if convenience will not allow,
     Stand in hard cure. [To the Fool] Come, help to bear thy master.
     Thou must not stay behind.
  Glou. Come, come, away!
                                         Exeunt [all but Edgar].
  Edg. When we our betters see bearing our woes,
     We scarcely think our miseries our foes.
     Who alone suffers suffers most i' th' mind,
     Leaving free things and happy shows behind;
     But then the mind much sufferance doth o'erskip
     When grief hath mates, and bearing fellowship.
     How light and portable my pain seems now,
     When that which makes me bend makes the King bow,
     He childed as I fathered! Tom, away!
     Mark the high noises, and thyself bewray
     When false opinion, whose wrong thought defiles thee,
     In thy just proof repeals and reconciles thee.
     What will hap more to-night, safe scape the King!
     Lurk, lurk.                                         [Exit.]




Scene VII.
Gloucester's Castle.

Enter Cornwall, Regan, Goneril, [Edmund the] Bastard, and Servants.

  Corn. [to Goneril] Post speedily to my lord your husband, show him
     this letter. The army of France is landed.- Seek out the traitor
     Gloucester.
                                  [Exeunt some of the Servants.]
  Reg. Hang him instantly.
  Gon. Pluck out his eyes.
  Corn. Leave him to my displeasure. Edmund, keep you our sister
     company. The revenges we are bound to take upon your traitorous
     father are not fit for your beholding. Advise the Duke where you
     are going, to a most festinate preparation. We are bound to the
     like. Our posts shall be swift and intelligent betwixt us.
     Farewell, dear sister; farewell, my Lord of Gloucester.

                     Enter [Oswald the] Steward.

     How now? Where's the King?
  Osw. My Lord of Gloucester hath convey'd him hence.
     Some five or six and thirty of his knights,
     Hot questrists after him, met him at gate;
     Who, with some other of the lord's dependants,
     Are gone with him towards Dover, where they boast
     To have well-armed friends.
  Corn. Get horses for your mistress.
  Gon. Farewell, sweet lord, and sister.
  Corn. Edmund, farewell.
                           Exeunt Goneril, [Edmund, and Oswald].
     Go seek the traitor Gloucester,
     Pinion him like a thief, bring him before us.
                                        [Exeunt other Servants.]
     Though well we may not pass upon his life
     Without the form of justice, yet our power
     Shall do a court'sy to our wrath, which men
     May blame, but not control.

            Enter Gloucester, brought in by two or three.

     Who's there? the traitor?
  Reg. Ingrateful fox! 'tis he.
  Corn. Bind fast his corky arms.
  Glou. What mean, your Graces? Good my friends, consider
     You are my guests. Do me no foul play, friends.
  Corn. Bind him, I say.
                                            [Servants bind him.]
  Reg. Hard, hard. O filthy traitor!
  Glou. Unmerciful lady as you are, I am none.
  Corn. To this chair bind him. Villain, thou shalt find-
                                       [Regan plucks his beard.]
  Glou. By the kind gods, 'tis most ignobly done
     To pluck me by the beard.
  Reg. So white, and such a traitor!
  Glou. Naughty lady,
     These hairs which thou dost ravish from my chin
     Will quicken, and accuse thee. I am your host.
     With robber's hands my hospitable favours
     You should not ruffle thus. What will you do?
  Corn. Come, sir, what letters had you late from France?
  Reg. Be simple-answer'd, for we know the truth.
  Corn. And what confederacy have you with the traitors
     Late footed in the kingdom?
  Reg. To whose hands have you sent the lunatic King?
     Speak.
  Glou. I have a letter guessingly set down,
     Which came from one that's of a neutral heart,
     And not from one oppos'd.
  Corn. Cunning.
  Reg. And false.
  Corn. Where hast thou sent the King?
  Glou. To Dover.
  Reg. Wherefore to Dover? Wast thou not charg'd at peril-
  Corn. Wherefore to Dover? Let him first answer that.
  Glou. I am tied to th' stake, and I must stand the course.
  Reg. Wherefore to Dover, sir?
  Glou. Because I would not see thy cruel nails
     Pluck out his poor old eyes; nor thy fierce sister
     In his anointed flesh stick boarish fangs.
     The sea, with such a storm as his bare head
     In hell-black night endur'd, would have buoy'd up
     And quench'd the steeled fires.
     Yet, poor old heart, he holp the heavens to rain.
     If wolves had at thy gate howl'd that stern time,
     Thou shouldst have said, 'Good porter, turn the key.'
     All cruels else subscrib'd. But I shall see
     The winged vengeance overtake such children.
  Corn. See't shalt thou never. Fellows, hold the chair.
     Upon these eyes of thine I'll set my foot.
  Glou. He that will think to live till he be old,
     Give me some help!- O cruel! O ye gods!
  Reg. One side will mock another. Th' other too!
  Corn. If you see vengeance-
  1. Serv. Hold your hand, my lord!
     I have serv'd you ever since I was a child;
     But better service have I never done you
     Than now to bid you hold.
  Reg. How now, you dog?
  1. Serv. If you did wear a beard upon your chin,
     I'ld shake it on this quarrel.
  Reg. What do you mean?
  Corn. My villain!                               Draw and fight.
  1. Serv. Nay, then, come on, and take the chance of anger.
  Reg. Give me thy sword. A peasant stand up thus?
                        She takes a sword and runs at him behind.
  1. Serv. O, I am slain! My lord, you have one eye left
     To see some mischief on him. O!                     He dies.
  Corn. Lest it see more, prevent it. Out, vile jelly!
     Where is thy lustre now?
  Glou. All dark and comfortless! Where's my son Edmund?
     Edmund, enkindle all the sparks of nature
     To quit this horrid act.
  Reg. Out, treacherous villain!
     Thou call'st on him that hates thee. It was he
     That made the overture of thy treasons to us;
     Who is too good to pity thee.
  Glou. O my follies! Then Edgar was abus'd.
     Kind gods, forgive me that, and prosper him!
  Reg. Go thrust him out at gates, and let him smell
     His way to Dover.
                                     Exit [one] with Gloucester.
     How is't, my lord? How look you?
  Corn. I have receiv'd a hurt. Follow me, lady.
     Turn out that eyeless villain. Throw this slave
     Upon the dunghill. Regan, I bleed apace.
     Untimely comes this hurt. Give me your arm.
                                  Exit [Cornwall, led by Regan].
  2. Serv. I'll never care what wickedness I do,
     If this man come to good.
  3. Serv. If she live long,
     And in the end meet the old course of death,
     Women will all turn monsters.
  2. Serv. Let's follow the old Earl, and get the bedlam
     To lead him where he would. His roguish madness
     Allows itself to anything.
  3. Serv. Go thou. I'll fetch some flax and whites of eggs
     To apply to his bleeding face. Now heaven help him!
                                                         Exeunt.




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT IV. Scene I.
The heath.

Enter Edgar.

  Edg. Yet better thus, and known to be contemn'd,
     Than still contemn'd and flatter'd. To be worst,
     The lowest and most dejected thing of fortune,
     Stands still in esperance, lives not in fear.
     The lamentable change is from the best;
     The worst returns to laughter. Welcome then,
     Thou unsubstantial air that I embrace!
     The wretch that thou hast blown unto the worst
     Owes nothing to thy blasts.

                 Enter Gloucester, led by an Old Man.

     But who comes here?
     My father, poorly led? World, world, O world!
     But that thy strange mutations make us hate thee,
     Life would not yield to age.
  Old Man. O my good lord,
     I have been your tenant, and your father's tenant,
     These fourscore years.
  Glou. Away, get thee away! Good friend, be gone.
     Thy comforts can do me no good at all;
     Thee they may hurt.
  Old Man. You cannot see your way.
  Glou. I have no way, and therefore want no eyes;
     I stumbled when I saw. Full oft 'tis seen
     Our means secure us, and our mere defects
     Prove our commodities. Ah dear son Edgar,
     The food of thy abused father's wrath!
     Might I but live to see thee in my touch,
     I'ld say I had eyes again!
  Old Man. How now? Who's there?
  Edg. [aside] O gods! Who is't can say 'I am at the worst'?
     I am worse than e'er I was.
  Old Man. 'Tis poor mad Tom.
  Edg. [aside] And worse I may be yet. The worst is not
     So long as we can say 'This is the worst.'
  Old Man. Fellow, where goest?
  Glou. Is it a beggarman?
  Old Man. Madman and beggar too.
  Glou. He has some reason, else he could not beg.
     I' th' last night's storm I such a fellow saw,
     Which made me think a man a worm. My son
     Came then into my mind, and yet my mind
     Was then scarce friends with him. I have heard more since.
     As flies to wanton boys are we to th' gods.
     They kill us for their sport.
  Edg. [aside] How should this be?
     Bad is the trade that must play fool to sorrow,
     Ang'ring itself and others.- Bless thee, master!
  Glou. Is that the naked fellow?
  Old Man. Ay, my lord.
  Glou. Then prithee get thee gone. If for my sake
     Thou wilt o'ertake us hence a mile or twain
     I' th' way toward Dover, do it for ancient love;
     And bring some covering for this naked soul,
     Who I'll entreat to lead me.
  Old Man. Alack, sir, he is mad!
  Glou. 'Tis the time's plague when madmen lead the blind.
     Do as I bid thee, or rather do thy pleasure.
     Above the rest, be gone.
  Old Man. I'll bring him the best 'parel that I have,
     Come on't what will.                                  Exit.
  Glou. Sirrah naked fellow-
  Edg. Poor Tom's acold. [Aside] I cannot daub it further.
  Glou. Come hither, fellow.
  Edg. [aside] And yet I must.- Bless thy sweet eyes, they bleed.
  Glou. Know'st thou the way to Dover?
  Edg. Both stile and gate, horseway and footpath. Poor Tom hath been
     scar'd out of his good wits. Bless thee, good man's son, from
     the foul fiend! Five fiends have been in poor Tom at once: of
     lust, as Obidicut; Hobbididence, prince of dumbness; Mahu, of
     stealing; Modo, of murder; Flibbertigibbet, of mopping and
     mowing, who since possesses chambermaids and waiting women. So,
     bless thee, master!
  Glou. Here, take this Purse, thou whom the heavens' plagues
     Have humbled to all strokes. That I am wretched
     Makes thee the happier. Heavens, deal so still!
     Let the superfluous and lust-dieted man,
     That slaves your ordinance, that will not see
     Because he does not feel, feel your pow'r quickly;
     So distribution should undo excess,
     And each man have enough. Dost thou know Dover?
  Edg. Ay, master.
  Glou. There is a cliff, whose high and bending head
     Looks fearfully in the confined deep.
     Bring me but to the very brim of it,
     And I'll repair the misery thou dost bear
     With something rich about me. From that place
     I shall no leading need.
  Edg. Give me thy arm.
     Poor Tom shall lead thee.
                                                         Exeunt.




Scene II.
Before the Duke of Albany's Palace.

Enter Goneril and [Edmund the] Bastard.

  Gon. Welcome, my lord. I marvel our mild husband
     Not met us on the way.

                     Enter [Oswald the] Steward.

     Now, where's your master?
  Osw. Madam, within, but never man so chang'd.
     I told him of the army that was landed:
     He smil'd at it. I told him you were coming:
     His answer was, 'The worse.' Of Gloucester's treachery
     And of the loyal service of his son
     When I inform'd him, then he call'd me sot
     And told me I had turn'd the wrong side out.
     What most he should dislike seems pleasant to him;
     What like, offensive.
  Gon. [to Edmund] Then shall you go no further.
     It is the cowish terror of his spirit,
     That dares not undertake. He'll not feel wrongs
     Which tie him to an answer. Our wishes on the way
     May prove effects. Back, Edmund, to my brother.
     Hasten his musters and conduct his pow'rs.
     I must change arms at home and give the distaff
     Into my husband's hands. This trusty servant
     Shall pass between us. Ere long you are like to hear
     (If you dare venture in your own behalf)
     A mistress's command. Wear this.          [Gives a favour.]
     Spare speech.
     Decline your head. This kiss, if it durst speak,
     Would stretch thy spirits up into the air.
     Conceive, and fare thee well.
  Edm. Yours in the ranks of death!                        Exit.
  Gon. My most dear Gloucester!
     O, the difference of man and man!
     To thee a woman's services are due;
     My fool usurps my body.
  Osw. Madam, here comes my lord.                          Exit.

                            Enter Albany.

  Gon. I have been worth the whistle.
  Alb. O Goneril,
     You are not worth the dust which the rude wind
     Blows in your face! I fear your disposition.
     That nature which contemns it origin
     Cannot be bordered certain in itself.
     She that herself will sliver and disbranch
     From her material sap, perforce must wither
     And come to deadly use.
  Gon. No more! The text is foolish.
  Alb. Wisdom and goodness to the vile seem vile;
     Filths savour but themselves. What have you done?
     Tigers, not daughters, what have you perform'd?
     A father, and a gracious aged man,
     Whose reverence even the head-lugg'd bear would lick,
     Most barbarous, most degenerate, have you madded.
     Could my good brother suffer you to do it?
     A man, a prince, by him so benefited!
     If that the heavens do not their visible spirits
     Send quickly down to tame these vile offences,
     It will come,
     Humanity must perforce prey on itself,
     Like monsters of the deep.
  Gon. Milk-liver'd man!
     That bear'st a cheek for blows, a head for wrongs;
     Who hast not in thy brows an eye discerning
     Thine honour from thy suffering; that not know'st
     Fools do those villains pity who are punish'd
     Ere they have done their mischief. Where's thy drum?
     France spreads his banners in our noiseless land,
     With plumed helm thy state begins to threat,
     Whiles thou, a moral fool, sit'st still, and criest
     'Alack, why does he so?'
  Alb. See thyself, devil!
     Proper deformity seems not in the fiend
     So horrid as in woman.
  Gon. O vain fool!
  Alb. Thou changed and self-cover'd thing, for shame!
     Bemonster not thy feature! Were't my fitness
     To let these hands obey my blood,
     They are apt enough to dislocate and tear
     Thy flesh and bones. Howe'er thou art a fiend,
     A woman's shape doth shield thee.
  Gon. Marry, your manhood mew!

                          Enter a Gentleman.

  Alb. What news?
  Gent. O, my good lord, the Duke of Cornwall 's dead,
     Slain by his servant, going to put out
     The other eye of Gloucester.
  Alb. Gloucester's eyes?
  Gent. A servant that he bred, thrill'd with remorse,
     Oppos'd against the act, bending his sword
     To his great master; who, thereat enrag'd,
     Flew on him, and amongst them fell'd him dead;
     But not without that harmful stroke which since
     Hath pluck'd him after.
  Alb. This shows you are above,
     You justicers, that these our nether crimes
     So speedily can venge! But O poor Gloucester!
     Lose he his other eye?
  Gent. Both, both, my lord.
     This letter, madam, craves a speedy answer.
     'Tis from your sister.
  Gon. [aside] One way I like this well;
     But being widow, and my Gloucester with her,
     May all the building in my fancy pluck
     Upon my hateful life. Another way
     The news is not so tart.- I'll read, and answer.
Exit.
  Alb. Where was his son when they did take his eyes?
  Gent. Come with my lady hither.
  Alb. He is not here.
  Gent. No, my good lord; I met him back again.
  Alb. Knows he the wickedness?
  Gent. Ay, my good lord. 'Twas he inform'd against him,
     And quit the house on purpose, that their punishment
     Might have the freer course.
  Alb. Gloucester, I live
     To thank thee for the love thou show'dst the King,
     And to revenge thine eyes. Come hither, friend.
     Tell me what more thou know'st.
                                                         Exeunt.




Scene III.
The French camp near Dover.

Enter Kent and a Gentleman.

  Kent. Why the King of France is so suddenly gone back know you the
     reason?
  Gent. Something he left imperfect in the state, which since his
     coming forth is thought of, which imports to the kingdom so much
     fear and danger that his personal return was most required and
     necessary.
  Kent. Who hath he left behind him general?
  Gent. The Marshal of France, Monsieur La Far.
  Kent. Did your letters pierce the Queen to any demonstration of
     grief?
  Gent. Ay, sir. She took them, read them in my presence,
     And now and then an ample tear trill'd down
     Her delicate cheek. It seem'd she was a queen
     Over her passion, who, most rebel-like,
     Sought to be king o'er her.
  Kent. O, then it mov'd her?
  Gent. Not to a rage. Patience and sorrow strove
     Who should express her goodliest. You have seen
     Sunshine and rain at once: her smiles and tears
     Were like, a better way. Those happy smilets
     That play'd on her ripe lip seem'd not to know
     What guests were in her eyes, which parted thence
     As pearls from diamonds dropp'd. In brief,
     Sorrow would be a rarity most belov'd,
     If all could so become it.
  Kent. Made she no verbal question?
  Gent. Faith, once or twice she heav'd the name of father
     Pantingly forth, as if it press'd her heart;
     Cried 'Sisters, sisters! Shame of ladies! Sisters!
     Kent! father! sisters! What, i' th' storm? i' th' night?
     Let pity not be believ'd!' There she shook
     The holy water from her heavenly eyes,
     And clamour moisten'd. Then away she started
     To deal with grief alone.
  Kent. It is the stars,
     The stars above us, govern our conditions;
     Else one self mate and mate could not beget
     Such different issues. You spoke not with her since?
  Gent. No.
  Kent. Was this before the King return'd?
  Gent. No, since.
  Kent. Well, sir, the poor distressed Lear's i' th' town;
     Who sometime, in his better tune, remembers
     What we are come about, and by no means
     Will yield to see his daughter.
  Gent. Why, good sir?
  Kent. A sovereign shame so elbows him; his own unkindness,
     That stripp'd her from his benediction, turn'd her
     To foreign casualties, gave her dear rights
     To his dog-hearted daughters- these things sting
     His mind so venomously that burning shame
     Detains him from Cordelia.
  Gent. Alack, poor gentleman!
  Kent. Of Albany's and Cornwall's powers you heard not?
  Gent. 'Tis so; they are afoot.
  Kent. Well, sir, I'll bring you to our master Lear
     And leave you to attend him. Some dear cause
     Will in concealment wrap me up awhile.
     When I am known aright, you shall not grieve
     Lending me this acquaintance. I pray you go
     Along with me.                                      Exeunt.




Scene IV.
The French camp.

Enter, with Drum and Colours, Cordelia, Doctor, and Soldiers.

  Cor. Alack, 'tis he! Why, he was met even now
     As mad as the vex'd sea, singing aloud,
     Crown'd with rank fumiter and furrow weeds,
     With hardocks, hemlock, nettles, cuckoo flow'rs,
     Darnel, and all the idle weeds that grow
     In our sustaining corn. A century send forth.
     Search every acre in the high-grown field
     And bring him to our eye. [Exit an Officer.] What can man's
        wisdom
     In the restoring his bereaved sense?
     He that helps him take all my outward worth.
  Doct. There is means, madam.
     Our foster nurse of nature is repose,
     The which he lacks. That to provoke in him
     Are many simples operative, whose power
     Will close the eye of anguish.
  Cor. All blest secrets,
     All you unpublish'd virtues of the earth,
     Spring with my tears! be aidant and remediate
     In the good man's distress! Seek, seek for him!
     Lest his ungovern'd rage dissolve the life
     That wants the means to lead it.

                           Enter Messenger.

  Mess. News, madam.
     The British pow'rs are marching hitherward.
  Cor. 'Tis known before. Our preparation stands
     In expectation of them. O dear father,
     It is thy business that I go about.
     Therefore great France
     My mourning and important tears hath pitied.
     No blown ambition doth our arms incite,
     But love, dear love, and our ag'd father's right.
     Soon may I hear and see him!
                                                         Exeunt.




Scene V.
Gloucester's Castle.

Enter Regan and [Oswald the] Steward.

  Reg. But are my brother's pow'rs set forth?
  Osw. Ay, madam.
  Reg. Himself in person there?
  Osw. Madam, with much ado.
     Your sister is the better soldier.
  Reg. Lord Edmund spake not with your lord at home?
  Osw. No, madam.
  Reg. What might import my sister's letter to him?
  Osw. I know not, lady.
  Reg. Faith, he is posted hence on serious matter.
     It was great ignorance, Gloucester's eyes being out,
     To let him live. Where he arrives he moves
     All hearts against us. Edmund, I think, is gone,
     In pity of his misery, to dispatch
     His nighted life; moreover, to descry
     The strength o' th' enemy.
  Osw. I must needs after him, madam, with my letter.
  Reg. Our troops set forth to-morrow. Stay with us.
     The ways are dangerous.
  Osw. I may not, madam.
     My lady charg'd my duty in this business.
  Reg. Why should she write to Edmund? Might not you
     Transport her purposes by word? Belike,
     Something- I know not what- I'll love thee much-
     Let me unseal the letter.
  Osw. Madam, I had rather-
  Reg. I know your lady does not love her husband;
     I am sure of that; and at her late being here
     She gave strange eliads and most speaking looks
     To noble Edmund. I know you are of her bosom.
  Osw. I, madam?
  Reg. I speak in understanding. Y'are! I know't.
     Therefore I do advise you take this note.
     My lord is dead; Edmund and I have talk'd,
     And more convenient is he for my hand
     Than for your lady's. You may gather more.
     If you do find him, pray you give him this;
     And when your mistress hears thus much from you,
     I pray desire her call her wisdom to her.
     So farewell.
     If you do chance to hear of that blind traitor,
     Preferment falls on him that cuts him off.
  Osw. Would I could meet him, madam! I should show
     What party I do follow.
  Reg. Fare thee well.                                   Exeunt.




Scene VI.
The country near Dover.

Enter Gloucester, and Edgar [like a Peasant].

  Glou. When shall I come to th' top of that same hill?
  Edg. You do climb up it now. Look how we labour.
  Glou. Methinks the ground is even.
  Edg. Horrible steep.
     Hark, do you hear the sea?
  Glou. No, truly.
  Edg. Why, then, your other senses grow imperfect
     By your eyes' anguish.
  Glou. So may it be indeed.
     Methinks thy voice is alter'd, and thou speak'st
     In better phrase and matter than thou didst.
  Edg. Y'are much deceiv'd. In nothing am I chang'd
     But in my garments.
  Glou. Methinks y'are better spoken.
  Edg. Come on, sir; here's the place. Stand still. How fearful
     And dizzy 'tis to cast one's eyes so low!
     The crows and choughs that wing the midway air
     Show scarce so gross as beetles. Halfway down
     Hangs one that gathers sampire- dreadful trade!
     Methinks he seems no bigger than his head.
     The fishermen that walk upon the beach
     Appear like mice; and yond tall anchoring bark,
     Diminish'd to her cock; her cock, a buoy
     Almost too small for sight. The murmuring surge
     That on th' unnumb'red idle pebble chafes
     Cannot be heard so high. I'll look no more,
     Lest my brain turn, and the deficient sight
     Topple down headlong.
  Glou. Set me where you stand.
  Edg. Give me your hand. You are now within a foot
     Of th' extreme verge. For all beneath the moon
     Would I not leap upright.
  Glou. Let go my hand.
     Here, friend, is another purse; in it a jewel
     Well worth a poor man's taking. Fairies and gods
     Prosper it with thee! Go thou further off;
     Bid me farewell, and let me hear thee going.
  Edg. Now fare ye well, good sir.
  Glou. With all my heart.
  Edg. [aside]. Why I do trifle thus with his despair
     Is done to cure it.
  Glou. O you mighty gods!                            He kneels.
     This world I do renounce, and, in your sights,
     Shake patiently my great affliction off.
     If I could bear it longer and not fall
     To quarrel with your great opposeless wills,
     My snuff and loathed part of nature should
     Burn itself out. If Edgar live, O, bless him!
     Now, fellow, fare thee well.
                                  He falls [forward and swoons].
  Edg. Gone, sir, farewell.-
     And yet I know not how conceit may rob
     The treasury of life when life itself
     Yields to the theft. Had he been where he thought,
     By this had thought been past.- Alive or dead?
     Ho you, sir! friend! Hear you, sir? Speak!-
     Thus might he pass indeed. Yet he revives.
     What are you, sir?
  Glou. Away, and let me die.
  Edg. Hadst thou been aught but gossamer, feathers, air,
     So many fadom down precipitating,
     Thou'dst shiver'd like an egg; but thou dost breathe;
     Hast heavy substance; bleed'st not; speak'st; art sound.
     Ten masts at each make not the altitude
     Which thou hast perpendicularly fell.
     Thy life is a miracle. Speak yet again.
  Glou. But have I fall'n, or no?
  Edg. From the dread summit of this chalky bourn.
     Look up a-height. The shrill-gorg'd lark so far
     Cannot be seen or heard. Do but look up.
  Glou. Alack, I have no eyes!
     Is wretchedness depriv'd that benefit
     To end itself by death? 'Twas yet some comfort
     When misery could beguile the tyrant's rage
     And frustrate his proud will.
  Edg. Give me your arm.
     Up- so. How is't? Feel you your legs? You stand.
  Glou. Too well, too well.
  Edg. This is above all strangeness.
     Upon the crown o' th' cliff what thing was that
     Which parted from you?
  Glou. A poor unfortunate beggar.
  Edg. As I stood here below, methought his eyes
     Were two full moons; he had a thousand noses,
     Horns whelk'd and wav'd like the enridged sea.
     It was some fiend. Therefore, thou happy father,
     Think that the clearest gods, who make them honours
     Of men's impossibility, have preserv'd thee.
  Glou. I do remember now. Henceforth I'll bear
     Affliction till it do cry out itself
     'Enough, enough,' and die. That thing you speak of,
     I took it for a man. Often 'twould say
     'The fiend, the fiend'- he led me to that place.
  Edg. Bear free and patient thoughts.

         Enter Lear, mad, [fantastically dressed with weeds].

     But who comes here?
     The safer sense will ne'er accommodate
     His master thus.
  Lear. No, they cannot touch me for coming;
     I am the King himself.
  Edg. O thou side-piercing sight!
  Lear. Nature 's above art in that respect. There's your press
     money. That fellow handles his bow like a crow-keeper. Draw me
     a clothier's yard. Look, look, a mouse! Peace, peace; this piece
     of toasted cheese will do't. There's my gauntlet; I'll prove it
     on a giant. Bring up the brown bills. O, well flown, bird! i'
     th' clout, i' th' clout! Hewgh! Give the word.
  Edg. Sweet marjoram.
  Lear. Pass.
  Glou. I know that voice.
  Lear. Ha! Goneril with a white beard? They flatter'd me like a dog,
     and told me I had white hairs in my beard ere the black ones
     were there. To say 'ay' and 'no' to everything I said! 'Ay' and
     'no' too was no good divinity. When the rain came to wet me
     once, and the wind to make me chatter; when the thunder would
     not peace at my bidding; there I found 'em, there I smelt 'em
     out. Go to, they are not men o' their words! They told me I was
     everything. 'Tis a lie- I am not ague-proof.
  Glou. The trick of that voice I do well remember.
     Is't not the King?
  Lear. Ay, every inch a king!
     When I do stare, see how the subject quakes.
     I pardon that man's life. What was thy cause?
     Adultery?
     Thou shalt not die. Die for adultery? No.
     The wren goes to't, and the small gilded fly
     Does lecher in my sight.
     Let copulation thrive; for Gloucester's bastard son
     Was kinder to his father than my daughters
     Got 'tween the lawful sheets.
     To't, luxury, pell-mell! for I lack soldiers.
     Behold yond simp'ring dame,
     Whose face between her forks presageth snow,
     That minces virtue, and does shake the head
     To hear of pleasure's name.
     The fitchew nor the soiled horse goes to't
     With a more riotous appetite.
     Down from the waist they are Centaurs,
     Though women all above.
     But to the girdle do the gods inherit,
     Beneath is all the fiend's.
     There's hell, there's darkness, there's the sulphurous pit;
     burning, scalding, stench, consumption. Fie, fie, fie! pah, pah!
     Give me an ounce of civet, good apothecary, to sweeten my
     imagination. There's money for thee.
  Glou. O, let me kiss that hand!
  Lear. Let me wipe it first; it smells of mortality.
  Glou. O ruin'd piece of nature! This great world
     Shall so wear out to naught. Dost thou know me?
  Lear. I remember thine eyes well enough. Dost thou squiny at me?
     No, do thy worst, blind Cupid! I'll not love. Read thou this
     challenge; mark but the penning of it.
  Glou. Were all the letters suns, I could not see one.
  Edg. [aside] I would not take this from report. It is,
     And my heart breaks at it.
  Lear. Read.
  Glou. What, with the case of eyes?
  Lear. O, ho, are you there with me? No eyes in your head, nor no
     money in your purse? Your eyes are in a heavy case, your purse
     in a light. Yet you see how this world goes.
  Glou. I see it feelingly.
  Lear. What, art mad? A man may see how the world goes with no eyes.
     Look with thine ears. See how yond justice rails upon yond
     simple thief. Hark in thine ear. Change places and, handy-dandy,
     which is the justice, which is the thief? Thou hast seen a
     farmer's dog bark at a beggar?
  Glou. Ay, sir.
  Lear. And the creature run from the cur? There thou mightst behold
     the great image of authority: a dog's obeyed in office.
     Thou rascal beadle, hold thy bloody hand!
     Why dost thou lash that whore? Strip thine own back.
     Thou hotly lusts to use her in that kind
     For which thou whip'st her. The usurer hangs the cozener.
     Through tatter'd clothes small vices do appear;
     Robes and furr'd gowns hide all. Plate sin with gold,
     And the strong lance of justice hurtless breaks;
     Arm it in rags, a pygmy's straw does pierce it.
     None does offend, none- I say none! I'll able 'em.
     Take that of me, my friend, who have the power
     To seal th' accuser's lips. Get thee glass eyes
     And, like a scurvy politician, seem
     To see the things thou dost not. Now, now, now, now!
     Pull off my boots. Harder, harder! So.
  Edg. O, matter and impertinency mix'd!
     Reason, in madness!
  Lear. If thou wilt weep my fortunes, take my eyes.
     I know thee well enough; thy name is Gloucester.
     Thou must be patient. We came crying hither;
     Thou know'st, the first time that we smell the air
     We wawl and cry. I will preach to thee. Mark.
  Glou. Alack, alack the day!
  Lear. When we are born, we cry that we are come
     To this great stage of fools. This' a good block.
     It were a delicate stratagem to shoe
     A troop of horse with felt. I'll put't in proof,
     And when I have stol'n upon these sons-in-law,
     Then kill, kill, kill, kill, kill, kill!

                 Enter a Gentleman [with Attendants].

  Gent. O, here he is! Lay hand upon him.- Sir,
     Your most dear daughter-
  Lear. No rescue? What, a prisoner? I am even
     The natural fool of fortune. Use me well;
     You shall have ransom. Let me have a surgeon;
     I am cut to th' brains.
  Gent. You shall have anything.
  Lear. No seconds? All myself?
     Why, this would make a man a man of salt,
     To use his eyes for garden waterpots,
     Ay, and laying autumn's dust.
  Gent. Good sir-
  Lear. I will die bravely, like a smug bridegroom. What!
     I will be jovial. Come, come, I am a king;
     My masters, know you that?
  Gent. You are a royal one, and we obey you.
  Lear. Then there's life in't. Nay, an you get it, you shall get it
     by running. Sa, sa, sa, sa!
                              Exit running. [Attendants follow.]
  Gent. A sight most pitiful in the meanest wretch,
     Past speaking of in a king! Thou hast one daughter
     Who redeems nature from the general curse
     Which twain have brought her to.
  Edg. Hail, gentle sir.
  Gent. Sir, speed you. What's your will?
  Edg. Do you hear aught, sir, of a battle toward?
  Gent. Most sure and vulgar. Every one hears that
     Which can distinguish sound.
  Edg. But, by your favour,
     How near's the other army?
  Gent. Near and on speedy foot. The main descry
     Stands on the hourly thought.
  Edg. I thank you sir. That's all.
  Gent. Though that the Queen on special cause is here,
     Her army is mov'd on.
  Edg. I thank you, sir
                                               Exit [Gentleman].
  Glou. You ever-gentle gods, take my breath from me;
     Let not my worser spirit tempt me again
     To die before you please!
  Edg. Well pray you, father.
  Glou. Now, good sir, what are you?
  Edg. A most poor man, made tame to fortune's blows,
     Who, by the art of known and feeling sorrows,
     Am pregnant to good pity. Give me your hand;
     I'll lead you to some biding.
  Glou. Hearty thanks.
     The bounty and the benison of heaven
     To boot, and boot!

                     Enter [Oswald the] Steward.

  Osw. A proclaim'd prize! Most happy!
     That eyeless head of thine was first fram'd flesh
     To raise my fortunes. Thou old unhappy traitor,
     Briefly thyself remember. The sword is out
     That must destroy thee.
  Glou. Now let thy friendly hand
     Put strength enough to't.
                                             [Edgar interposes.]
  Osw. Wherefore, bold peasant,
     Dar'st thou support a publish'd traitor? Hence!
     Lest that th' infection of his fortune take
     Like hold on thee. Let go his arm.
  Edg. Chill not let go, zir, without vurther 'cagion.
  Osw. Let go, slave, or thou diest!
  Edg. Good gentleman, go your gait, and let poor voke pass. An chud
     ha' bin zwagger'd out of my life, 'twould not ha' bin zo long as
     'tis by a vortnight. Nay, come not near th' old man. Keep out,
     che vore ye, or Ise try whether your costard or my ballow be the
     harder. Chill be plain with you.
  Osw. Out, dunghill!
                                                     They fight.
  Edg. Chill pick your teeth, zir. Come! No matter vor your foins.
                                                 [Oswald falls.]
  Osw. Slave, thou hast slain me. Villain, take my purse.
     If ever thou wilt thrive, bury my body,
     And give the letters which thou find'st about me
     To Edmund Earl of Gloucester. Seek him out
     Upon the British party. O, untimely death! Death!
                                                        He dies.
  Edg. I know thee well. A serviceable villain,
     As duteous to the vices of thy mistress
     As badness would desire.
  Glou. What, is he dead?
  Edg. Sit you down, father; rest you.
     Let's see his pockets; these letters that he speaks of
     May be my friends. He's dead. I am only sorry
     He had no other deathsman. Let us see.
     Leave, gentle wax; and, manners, blame us not.
     To know our enemies' minds, we'ld rip their hearts;
     Their papers, is more lawful.             Reads the letter.

       'Let our reciprocal vows be rememb'red. You have many
     opportunities to cut him off. If your will want not, time and
     place will be fruitfully offer'd. There is nothing done, if he
     return the conqueror. Then am I the prisoner, and his bed my
     jail; from the loathed warmth whereof deliver me, and supply the
     place for your labour.
           'Your (wife, so I would say) affectionate servant,
                                                          'Goneril.'

     O indistinguish'd space of woman's will!
     A plot upon her virtuous husband's life,
     And the exchange my brother! Here in the sands
     Thee I'll rake up, the post unsanctified
     Of murtherous lechers; and in the mature time
     With this ungracious paper strike the sight
     Of the death-practis'd Duke, For him 'tis well
     That of thy death and business I can tell.
  Glou. The King is mad. How stiff is my vile sense,
     That I stand up, and have ingenious feeling
     Of my huge sorrows! Better I were distract.
     So should my thoughts be sever'd from my griefs,
     And woes by wrong imaginations lose
     The knowledge of themselves.
                                                A drum afar off.
  Edg. Give me your hand.
     Far off methinks I hear the beaten drum.
     Come, father, I'll bestow you with a friend.        Exeunt.




Scene VII.
A tent in the French camp.

Enter Cordelia, Kent, Doctor, and Gentleman.

  Cor. O thou good Kent, how shall I live and work
     To match thy goodness? My life will be too short
     And every measure fail me.
  Kent. To be acknowledg'd, madam, is o'erpaid.
     All my reports go with the modest truth;
     Nor more nor clipp'd, but so.
  Cor. Be better suited.
     These weeds are memories of those worser hours.
     I prithee put them off.
  Kent. Pardon, dear madam.
     Yet to be known shortens my made intent.
     My boon I make it that you know me not
     Till time and I think meet.
  Cor. Then be't so, my good lord. [To the Doctor] How, does the King?
  Doct. Madam, sleeps still.
  Cor. O you kind gods,
     Cure this great breach in his abused nature!
     Th' untun'd and jarring senses, O, wind up
     Of this child-changed father!
  Doct. So please your Majesty
     That we may wake the King? He hath slept long.
  Cor. Be govern'd by your knowledge, and proceed
     I' th' sway of your own will. Is he array'd?

              Enter Lear in a chair carried by Servants.

  Gent. Ay, madam. In the heaviness of sleep
     We put fresh garments on him.
  Doct. Be by, good madam, when we do awake him.
     I doubt not of his temperance.
  Cor. Very well.
                                                          Music.
  Doct. Please you draw near. Louder the music there!
  Cor. O my dear father, restoration hang
     Thy medicine on my lips, and let this kiss
     Repair those violent harms that my two sisters
     Have in thy reverence made!
  Kent. Kind and dear princess!
  Cor. Had you not been their father, these white flakes
     Had challeng'd pity of them. Was this a face
     To be oppos'd against the warring winds?
     To stand against the deep dread-bolted thunder?
     In the most terrible and nimble stroke
     Of quick cross lightning? to watch- poor perdu!-
     With this thin helm? Mine enemy's dog,
     Though he had bit me, should have stood that night
     Against my fire; and wast thou fain, poor father,
     To hovel thee with swine and rogues forlorn,
     In short and musty straw? Alack, alack!
     'Tis wonder that thy life and wits at once
     Had not concluded all.- He wakes. Speak to him.
  Doct. Madam, do you; 'tis fittest.
  Cor. How does my royal lord? How fares your Majesty?
  Lear. You do me wrong to take me out o' th' grave.
     Thou art a soul in bliss; but I am bound
     Upon a wheel of fire, that mine own tears
     Do scald like molten lead.
  Cor. Sir, do you know me?
  Lear. You are a spirit, I know. When did you die?
  Cor. Still, still, far wide!
  Doct. He's scarce awake. Let him alone awhile.
  Lear. Where have I been? Where am I? Fair daylight,
     I am mightily abus'd. I should e'en die with pity,
     To see another thus. I know not what to say.
     I will not swear these are my hands. Let's see.
     I feel this pin prick. Would I were assur'd
     Of my condition!
  Cor. O, look upon me, sir,
     And hold your hands in benediction o'er me.
     No, sir, you must not kneel.
  Lear. Pray, do not mock me.
     I am a very foolish fond old man,
     Fourscore and upward, not an hour more nor less;
     And, to deal plainly,
     I fear I am not in my perfect mind.
     Methinks I should know you, and know this man;
     Yet I am doubtful; for I am mainly ignorant
     What place this is; and all the skill I have
     Remembers not these garments; nor I know not
     Where I did lodge last night. Do not laugh at me;
     For (as I am a man) I think this lady
     To be my child Cordelia.
  Cor. And so I am! I am!
  Lear. Be your tears wet? Yes, faith. I pray weep not.
     If you have poison for me, I will drink it.
     I know you do not love me; for your sisters
     Have, as I do remember, done me wrong.
     You have some cause, they have not.
  Cor. No cause, no cause.
  Lear. Am I in France?
  Kent. In your own kingdom, sir.
  Lear. Do not abuse me.
  Doct. Be comforted, good madam. The great rage
     You see is kill'd in him; and yet it is danger
     To make him even o'er the time he has lost.
     Desire him to go in. Trouble him no more
     Till further settling.
  Cor. Will't please your Highness walk?
  Lear. You must bear with me.
     Pray you now, forget and forgive. I am old and foolish.
                              Exeunt. Manent Kent and Gentleman.
  Gent. Holds it true, sir, that the Duke of Cornwall was so slain?
  Kent. Most certain, sir.
  Gent. Who is conductor of his people?
  Kent. As 'tis said, the bastard son of Gloucester.
  Gent. They say Edgar, his banish'd son, is with the Earl of Kent
     in Germany.
  Kent. Report is changeable. 'Tis time to look about; the powers of
     the kingdom approach apace.
  Gent. The arbitrement is like to be bloody.
     Fare you well, sir.                                 [Exit.]
  Kent. My point and period will be throughly wrought,
     Or well or ill, as this day's battle's fought.        Exit.




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT V. Scene I.
The British camp near Dover.

Enter, with Drum and Colours, Edmund, Regan, Gentleman, and Soldiers.

  Edm. Know of the Duke if his last purpose hold,
     Or whether since he is advis'd by aught
     To change the course. He's full of alteration
     And self-reproving. Bring his constant pleasure.
                                              [Exit an Officer.]
  Reg. Our sister's man is certainly miscarried.
  Edm. Tis to be doubted, madam.
  Reg. Now, sweet lord,
     You know the goodness I intend upon you.
     Tell me- but truly- but then speak the truth-
     Do you not love my sister?
  Edm. In honour'd love.
  Reg. But have you never found my brother's way
     To the forfended place?
  Edm. That thought abuses you.
  Reg. I am doubtful that you have been conjunct
     And bosom'd with her, as far as we call hers.
  Edm. No, by mine honour, madam.
  Reg. I never shall endure her. Dear my lord,
     Be not familiar with her.
  Edm. Fear me not.
     She and the Duke her husband!

       Enter, with Drum and Colours, Albany, Goneril, Soldiers.

  Gon. [aside] I had rather lose the battle than that sister
     Should loosen him and me.
  Alb. Our very loving sister, well bemet.
     Sir, this I hear: the King is come to his daughter,
     With others whom the rigour of our state
     Forc'd to cry out. Where I could not be honest,
     I never yet was valiant. For this business,
     It toucheth us as France invades our land,
     Not bolds the King, with others whom, I fear,
     Most just and heavy causes make oppose.
  Edm. Sir, you speak nobly.
  Reg. Why is this reason'd?
  Gon. Combine together 'gainst the enemy;
     For these domestic and particular broils
     Are not the question here.
  Alb. Let's then determine
     With th' ancient of war on our proceeding.
  Edm. I shall attend you presently at your tent.
  Reg. Sister, you'll go with us?
  Gon. No.
  Reg. 'Tis most convenient. Pray you go with us.
  Gon. [aside] O, ho, I know the riddle.- I will go.

          [As they are going out,] enter Edgar [disguised].

  Edg. If e'er your Grace had speech with man so poor,
     Hear me one word.
  Alb. I'll overtake you.- Speak.
                              Exeunt [all but Albany and Edgar].
  Edg. Before you fight the battle, ope this letter.
     If you have victory, let the trumpet sound
     For him that brought it. Wretched though I seem,
     I can produce a champion that will prove
     What is avouched there. If you miscarry,
     Your business of the world hath so an end,
     And machination ceases. Fortune love you!
  Alb. Stay till I have read the letter.
  Edg. I was forbid it.
     When time shall serve, let but the herald cry,
     And I'll appear again.
  Alb. Why, fare thee well. I will o'erlook thy paper.
                                                   Exit [Edgar].

                            Enter Edmund.

  Edm. The enemy 's in view; draw up your powers.
     Here is the guess of their true strength and forces
     By diligent discovery; but your haste
     Is now urg'd on you.
  Alb. We will greet the time.                             Exit.
  Edm. To both these sisters have I sworn my love;
     Each jealous of the other, as the stung
     Are of the adder. Which of them shall I take?
     Both? one? or neither? Neither can be enjoy'd,
     If both remain alive. To take the widow
     Exasperates, makes mad her sister Goneril;
     And hardly shall I carry out my side,
     Her husband being alive. Now then, we'll use
     His countenance for the battle, which being done,
     Let her who would be rid of him devise
     His speedy taking off. As for the mercy
     Which he intends to Lear and to Cordelia-
     The battle done, and they within our power,
     Shall never see his pardon; for my state
     Stands on me to defend, not to debate.                Exit.




Scene II.
A field between the two camps.

Alarum within. Enter, with Drum and Colours, the Powers of France
over the stage, Cordelia with her Father in her hand, and exeunt.

Enter Edgar and Gloucester.

  Edg. Here, father, take the shadow of this tree
     For your good host. Pray that the right may thrive.
     If ever I return to you again,
     I'll bring you comfort.
  Glou. Grace go with you, sir!
                                                   Exit [Edgar].

               Alarum and retreat within. Enter Edgar,

  Edg. Away, old man! give me thy hand! away!
     King Lear hath lost, he and his daughter ta'en.
     Give me thy hand! come on!
  Glou. No further, sir. A man may rot even here.
  Edg. What, in ill thoughts again? Men must endure
     Their going hence, even as their coming hither;
     Ripeness is all. Come on.
  Glou. And that's true too.                             Exeunt.




Scene III.
The British camp, near Dover.

Enter, in conquest, with Drum and Colours, Edmund; Lear and Cordelia
as prisoners; Soldiers, Captain.

  Edm. Some officers take them away. Good guard
     Until their greater pleasures first be known
     That are to censure them.
  Cor. We are not the first
     Who with best meaning have incurr'd the worst.
     For thee, oppressed king, am I cast down;
     Myself could else outfrown false Fortune's frown.
     Shall we not see these daughters and these sisters?
  Lear. No, no, no, no! Come, let's away to prison.
     We two alone will sing like birds i' th' cage.
     When thou dost ask me blessing, I'll kneel down
     And ask of thee forgiveness. So we'll live,
     And pray, and sing, and tell old tales, and laugh
     At gilded butterflies, and hear poor rogues
     Talk of court news; and we'll talk with them too-
     Who loses and who wins; who's in, who's out-
     And take upon 's the mystery of things,
     As if we were God's spies; and we'll wear out,
     In a wall'd prison, packs and sects of great ones
     That ebb and flow by th' moon.
  Edm. Take them away.
  Lear. Upon such sacrifices, my Cordelia,
     The gods themselves throw incense. Have I caught thee?
     He that parts us shall bring a brand from heaven
     And fire us hence like foxes. Wipe thine eyes.
     The goodyears shall devour 'em, flesh and fell,
     Ere they shall make us weep! We'll see 'em starv'd first.
     Come.                  Exeunt [Lear and Cordelia, guarded].
  Edm. Come hither, Captain; hark.
     Take thou this note [gives a paper]. Go follow them to prison.
     One step I have advanc'd thee. If thou dost
     As this instructs thee, thou dost make thy way
     To noble fortunes. Know thou this, that men
     Are as the time is. To be tender-minded
     Does not become a sword. Thy great employment
     Will not bear question. Either say thou'lt do't,
     Or thrive by other means.
  Capt. I'll do't, my lord.
  Edm. About it! and write happy when th' hast done.
     Mark- I say, instantly; and carry it so
     As I have set it down.
  Capt. I cannot draw a cart, nor eat dried oats;
     If it be man's work, I'll do't.                       Exit.

          Flourish. Enter Albany, Goneril, Regan, Soldiers.

  Alb. Sir, you have show'd to-day your valiant strain,
     And fortune led you well. You have the captives
     Who were the opposites of this day's strife.
     We do require them of you, so to use them
     As we shall find their merits and our safety
     May equally determine.
  Edm. Sir, I thought it fit
     To send the old and miserable King
     To some retention and appointed guard;
     Whose age has charms in it, whose title more,
     To pluck the common bosom on his side
     And turn our impress'd lances in our eyes
     Which do command them. With him I sent the Queen,
     My reason all the same; and they are ready
     To-morrow, or at further space, t' appear
     Where you shall hold your session. At this time
     We sweat and bleed: the friend hath lost his friend;
     And the best quarrels, in the heat, are curs'd
     By those that feel their sharpness.
     The question of Cordelia and her father
     Requires a fitter place.
  Alb. Sir, by your patience,
     I hold you but a subject of this war,
     Not as a brother.
  Reg. That's as we list to grace him.
     Methinks our pleasure might have been demanded
     Ere you had spoke so far. He led our powers,
     Bore the commission of my place and person,
     The which immediacy may well stand up
     And call itself your brother.
  Gon. Not so hot!
     In his own grace he doth exalt himself
     More than in your addition.
  Reg. In my rights
     By me invested, he compeers the best.
  Gon. That were the most if he should husband you.
  Reg. Jesters do oft prove prophets.
  Gon. Holla, holla!
     That eye that told you so look'd but asquint.
  Reg. Lady, I am not well; else I should answer
     From a full-flowing stomach. General,
     Take thou my soldiers, prisoners, patrimony;
     Dispose of them, of me; the walls are thine.
     Witness the world that I create thee here
     My lord and master.
  Gon. Mean you to enjoy him?
  Alb. The let-alone lies not in your good will.
  Edm. Nor in thine, lord.
  Alb. Half-blooded fellow, yes.
  Reg. [to Edmund] Let the drum strike, and prove my title thine.
  Alb. Stay yet; hear reason. Edmund, I arrest thee
     On capital treason; and, in thine attaint,
     This gilded serpent [points to Goneril]. For your claim, fair
        sister,
     I bar it in the interest of my wife.
     'Tis she is subcontracted to this lord,
     And I, her husband, contradict your banes.
     If you will marry, make your loves to me;
     My lady is bespoke.
  Gon. An interlude!
  Alb. Thou art arm'd, Gloucester. Let the trumpet sound.
     If none appear to prove upon thy person
     Thy heinous, manifest, and many treasons,
     There is my pledge [throws down a glove]! I'll prove it on thy
        heart,
     Ere I taste bread, thou art in nothing less
     Than I have here proclaim'd thee.
  Reg. Sick, O, sick!
  Gon. [aside] If not, I'll ne'er trust medicine.
  Edm. There's my exchange [throws down a glove]. What in the world
        he is
     That names me traitor, villain-like he lies.
     Call by thy trumpet. He that dares approach,
     On him, on you, who not? I will maintain
     My truth and honour firmly.
  Alb. A herald, ho!
  Edm. A herald, ho, a herald!
  Alb. Trust to thy single virtue; for thy soldiers,
     All levied in my name, have in my name
     Took their discharge.
  Reg. My sickness grows upon me.
  Alb. She is not well. Convey her to my tent.
                                              [Exit Regan, led.]

                           Enter a Herald.

     Come hither, herald. Let the trumpet sound,
     And read out this.
  Capt. Sound, trumpet!                        A trumpet sounds.

  Her. (reads) 'If any man of quality or degree within the lists of
     the army will maintain upon Edmund, supposed Earl of Gloucester,
     that he is a manifold traitor, let him appear by the third sound
     of the trumpet. He is bold in his defence.'

  Edm. Sound!                                     First trumpet.
  Her. Again!                                    Second trumpet.
  Her. Again!                                     Third trumpet.
                                         Trumpet answers within.

    Enter Edgar, armed, at the third sound, a Trumpet before him.

  Alb. Ask him his purposes, why he appears
     Upon this call o' th' trumpet.
  Her. What are you?
     Your name, your quality? and why you answer
     This present summons?
  Edg. Know my name is lost;
     By treason's tooth bare-gnawn and canker-bit.
     Yet am I noble as the adversary
     I come to cope.
  Alb. Which is that adversary?
  Edg. What's he that speaks for Edmund Earl of Gloucester?
  Edm. Himself. What say'st thou to him?
  Edg. Draw thy sword,
     That, if my speech offend a noble heart,
     Thy arm may do thee justice. Here is mine.
     Behold, it is the privilege of mine honours,
     My oath, and my profession. I protest-
     Maugre thy strength, youth, place, and eminence,
     Despite thy victor sword and fire-new fortune,
     Thy valour and thy heart- thou art a traitor;
     False to thy gods, thy brother, and thy father;
     Conspirant 'gainst this high illustrious prince;
     And from th' extremest upward of thy head
     To the descent and dust beneath thy foot,
     A most toad-spotted traitor. Say thou 'no,'
     This sword, this arm, and my best spirits are bent
     To prove upon thy heart, whereto I speak,
     Thou liest.
  Edm. In wisdom I should ask thy name;
     But since thy outside looks so fair and warlike,
     And that thy tongue some say of breeding breathes,
     What safe and nicely I might well delay
     By rule of knighthood, I disdain and spurn.
     Back do I toss those treasons to thy head;
     With the hell-hated lie o'erwhelm thy heart;
     Which- for they yet glance by and scarcely bruise-
     This sword of mine shall give them instant way
     Where they shall rest for ever. Trumpets, speak!
                                 Alarums. Fight. [Edmund falls.]
  Alb. Save him, save him!
  Gon. This is mere practice, Gloucester.
     By th' law of arms thou wast not bound to answer
     An unknown opposite. Thou art not vanquish'd,
     But cozen'd and beguil'd.
  Alb. Shut your mouth, dame,
     Or with this paper shall I stop it. [Shows her her letter to
     Edmund.]- [To Edmund]. Hold, sir.
     [To Goneril] Thou worse than any name, read thine own evil.
     No tearing, lady! I perceive you know it.
  Gon. Say if I do- the laws are mine, not thine.
     Who can arraign me for't?
  Alb. Most monstrous!
     Know'st thou this paper?
  Gon. Ask me not what I know.                             Exit.
  Alb. Go after her. She's desperate; govern her.
                                              [Exit an Officer.]
  Edm. What, you have charg'd me with, that have I done,
     And more, much more. The time will bring it out.
     'Tis past, and so am I.- But what art thou
     That hast this fortune on me? If thou'rt noble,
     I do forgive thee.
  Edg. Let's exchange charity.
     I am no less in blood than thou art, Edmund;
     If more, the more th' hast wrong'd me.
     My name is Edgar and thy father's son.
     The gods are just, and of our pleasant vices
     Make instruments to scourge us.
     The dark and vicious place where thee he got
     Cost him his eyes.
  Edm. Th' hast spoken right; 'tis true.
     The wheel is come full circle; I am here.
  Alb. Methought thy very gait did prophesy
     A royal nobleness. I must embrace thee.
     Let sorrow split my heart if ever I
     Did hate thee, or thy father!
  Edg. Worthy prince, I know't.
  Alb. Where have you hid yourself?
     How have you known the miseries of your father?
  Edg. By nursing them, my lord. List a brief tale;
     And when 'tis told, O that my heart would burst!
     The bloody proclamation to escape
     That follow'd me so near (O, our lives' sweetness!
     That with the pain of death would hourly die
     Rather than die at once!) taught me to shift
     Into a madman's rags, t' assume a semblance
     That very dogs disdain'd; and in this habit
     Met I my father with his bleeding rings,
     Their precious stones new lost; became his guide,
     Led him, begg'd for him, sav'd him from despair;
     Never (O fault!) reveal'd myself unto him
     Until some half hour past, when I was arm'd,
     Not sure, though hoping of this good success,
     I ask'd his blessing, and from first to last
     Told him my pilgrimage. But his flaw'd heart
     (Alack, too weak the conflict to support!)
     'Twixt two extremes of passion, joy and grief,
     Burst smilingly.
  Edm. This speech of yours hath mov'd me,
     And shall perchance do good; but speak you on;
     You look as you had something more to say.
  Alb. If there be more, more woful, hold it in;
     For I am almost ready to dissolve,
     Hearing of this.
  Edg. This would have seem'd a period
     To such as love not sorrow; but another,
     To amplify too much, would make much more,
     And top extremity.
     Whilst I was big in clamour, came there a man,
     Who, having seen me in my worst estate,
     Shunn'd my abhorr'd society; but then, finding
     Who 'twas that so endur'd, with his strong arms
     He fastened on my neck, and bellowed out
     As he'd burst heaven; threw him on my father;
     Told the most piteous tale of Lear and him
     That ever ear receiv'd; which in recounting
     His grief grew puissant, and the strings of life
     Began to crack. Twice then the trumpets sounded,
     And there I left him tranc'd.
  Alb. But who was this?
  Edg. Kent, sir, the banish'd Kent; who in disguise
     Followed his enemy king and did him service
     Improper for a slave.

                Enter a Gentleman with a bloody knife.

  Gent. Help, help! O, help!
  Edg. What kind of help?
  Alb. Speak, man.
  Edg. What means that bloody knife?
  Gent. 'Tis hot, it smokes.
     It came even from the heart of- O! she's dead!
  Alb. Who dead? Speak, man.
  Gent. Your lady, sir, your lady! and her sister
     By her is poisoned; she hath confess'd it.
  Edm. I was contracted to them both. All three
     Now marry in an instant.

                             Enter Kent.

  Edg. Here comes Kent.
  Alb. Produce their bodies, be they alive or dead.
                                               [Exit Gentleman.]
     This judgement of the heavens, that makes us tremble
     Touches us not with pity. O, is this he?
     The time will not allow the compliment
     That very manners urges.
  Kent. I am come
     To bid my king and master aye good night.
     Is he not here?
  Alb. Great thing of us forgot!
     Speak, Edmund, where's the King? and where's Cordelia?
                 The bodies of Goneril and Regan are brought in.
     Seest thou this object, Kent?
  Kent. Alack, why thus?
  Edm. Yet Edmund was belov'd.
     The one the other poisoned for my sake,
     And after slew herself.
  Alb. Even so. Cover their faces.
  Edm. I pant for life. Some good I mean to do,
     Despite of mine own nature. Quickly send
     (Be brief in't) to the castle; for my writ
     Is on the life of Lear and on Cordelia.
     Nay, send in time.
  Alb. Run, run, O, run!
  Edg. To who, my lord? Who has the office? Send
     Thy token of reprieve.
  Edm. Well thought on. Take my sword;
     Give it the Captain.
  Alb. Haste thee for thy life.                    [Exit Edgar.]
  Edm. He hath commission from thy wife and me
     To hang Cordelia in the prison and
     To lay the blame upon her own despair
     That she fordid herself.
  Alb. The gods defend her! Bear him hence awhile.
                                          [Edmund is borne off.]

    Enter Lear, with Cordelia [dead] in his arms, [Edgar, Captain,
                        and others following].

  Lear. Howl, howl, howl, howl! O, you are men of stone.
     Had I your tongues and eyes, I'ld use them so
     That heaven's vault should crack. She's gone for ever!
     I know when one is dead, and when one lives.
     She's dead as earth. Lend me a looking glass.
     If that her breath will mist or stain the stone,
     Why, then she lives.
  Kent. Is this the promis'd end?
  Edg. Or image of that horror?
  Alb. Fall and cease!
  Lear. This feather stirs; she lives! If it be so,
     It is a chance which does redeem all sorrows
     That ever I have felt.
  Kent. O my good master!
  Lear. Prithee away!
  Edg. 'Tis noble Kent, your friend.
  Lear. A plague upon you, murderers, traitors all!
     I might have sav'd her; now she's gone for ever!
     Cordelia, Cordelia! stay a little. Ha!
     What is't thou say'st, Her voice was ever soft,
     Gentle, and low- an excellent thing in woman.
     I kill'd the slave that was a-hanging thee.
  Capt. 'Tis true, my lords, he did.
  Lear. Did I not, fellow?
     I have seen the day, with my good biting falchion
     I would have made them skip. I am old now,
     And these same crosses spoil me. Who are you?
     Mine eyes are not o' th' best. I'll tell you straight.
  Kent. If fortune brag of two she lov'd and hated,
     One of them we behold.
  Lear. This' a dull sight. Are you not Kent?
  Kent. The same-
     Your servant Kent. Where is your servant Caius?
  Lear. He's a good fellow, I can tell you that.
     He'll strike, and quickly too. He's dead and rotten.
  Kent. No, my good lord; I am the very man-
  Lear. I'll see that straight.
  Kent. That from your first of difference and decay
     Have followed your sad steps.
  Lear. You're welcome hither.
  Kent. Nor no man else! All's cheerless, dark, and deadly.
     Your eldest daughters have fordone themselves,
     And desperately are dead.
  Lear. Ay, so I think.
  Alb. He knows not what he says; and vain is it
     That we present us to him.
  Edg. Very bootless.

                           Enter a Captain.

  Capt. Edmund is dead, my lord.
  Alb. That's but a trifle here.
     You lords and noble friends, know our intent.
     What comfort to this great decay may come
     Shall be applied. For us, we will resign,
     During the life of this old Majesty,
     To him our absolute power; [to Edgar and Kent] you to your
        rights;
     With boot, and Such addition as your honours
     Have more than merited.- All friends shall taste
     The wages of their virtue, and all foes
     The cup of their deservings.- O, see, see!
  Lear. And my poor fool is hang'd! No, no, no life!
     Why should a dog, a horse, a rat, have life,
     And thou no breath at all? Thou'lt come no more,
     Never, never, never, never, never!
     Pray you undo this button. Thank you, sir.
     Do you see this? Look on her! look! her lips!
     Look there, look there!                            He dies.
  Edg. He faints! My lord, my lord!
  Kent. Break, heart; I prithee break!
  Edg. Look up, my lord.
  Kent. Vex not his ghost. O, let him pass! He hates him
     That would upon the rack of this tough world
     Stretch him out longer.
  Edg. He is gone indeed.
  Kent. The wonder is, he hath endur'd so long.
     He but usurp'd his life.
  Alb. Bear them from hence. Our present business
     Is general woe. [To Kent and Edgar] Friends of my soul, you
        twain
     Rule in this realm, and the gor'd state sustain.
  Kent. I have a journey, sir, shortly to go.
     My master calls me; I must not say no.
  Alb. The weight of this sad time we must obey,
     Speak what we feel, not what we ought to say.
     The oldest have borne most; we that are young
     Shall never see so much, nor live so long.
                                       Exeunt with a dead march.


THE END



<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>






1595

LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST

by William Shakespeare



Dramatis Personae.

  FERDINAND, King of Navarre
  BEROWNE,    lord attending on the King
  LONGAVILLE,  "      "      "   "   "
  DUMAIN,      "      "      "   "   "
  BOYET,   lord attending on the Princess of France
  MARCADE,   "     "       "  "     "      "    "
  DON ADRIANO DE ARMADO, fantastical Spaniard
  SIR NATHANIEL, a curate
  HOLOFERNES, a schoolmaster
  DULL, a constable
  COSTARD, a clown
  MOTH, page to Armado
  A FORESTER

  THE PRINCESS OF FRANCE
  ROSALINE, lady attending on the Princess
  MARIA,      "     "       "  "     "
  KATHARINE, lady attending on the Princess
  JAQUENETTA, a country wench

  Lords, Attendants, etc.




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



SCENE:
Navarre


ACT I. SCENE I.
Navarre. The King's park

Enter the King, BEROWNE, LONGAVILLE, and DUMAIN

  KING. Let fame, that all hunt after in their lives,
    Live regist'red upon our brazen tombs,
    And then grace us in the disgrace of death;
    When, spite of cormorant devouring Time,
    Th' endeavour of this present breath may buy
    That honour which shall bate his scythe's keen edge,
    And make us heirs of all eternity.
    Therefore, brave conquerors- for so you are
    That war against your own affections
    And the huge army of the world's desires-
    Our late edict shall strongly stand in force:
    Navarre shall be the wonder of the world;
    Our court shall be a little Academe,
    Still and contemplative in living art.
    You three, Berowne, Dumain, and Longaville,
    Have sworn for three years' term to live with me
    My fellow-scholars, and to keep those statutes
    That are recorded in this schedule here.
    Your oaths are pass'd; and now subscribe your names,
    That his own hand may strike his honour down
    That violates the smallest branch herein.
    If you are arm'd to do as sworn to do,
    Subscribe to your deep oaths, and keep it too.
  LONGAVILLE. I am resolv'd; 'tis but a three years' fast.
    The mind shall banquet, though the body pine.
    Fat paunches have lean pates; and dainty bits
    Make rich the ribs, but bankrupt quite the wits.
  DUMAIN. My loving lord, Dumain is mortified.
    The grosser manner of these world's delights
    He throws upon the gross world's baser slaves;
    To love, to wealth, to pomp, I pine and die,
    With all these living in philosophy.
  BEROWNE. I can but say their protestation over;
    So much, dear liege, I have already sworn,
    That is, to live and study here three years.
    But there are other strict observances,
    As: not to see a woman in that term,
    Which I hope well is not enrolled there;
    And one day in a week to touch no food,
    And but one meal on every day beside,
    The which I hope is not enrolled there;
    And then to sleep but three hours in the night
    And not be seen to wink of all the day-
    When I was wont to think no harm all night,
    And make a dark night too of half the day-
    Which I hope well is not enrolled there.
    O, these are barren tasks, too hard to keep,
    Not to see ladies, study, fast, not sleep!
  KING. Your oath is pass'd to pass away from these.
  BEROWNE. Let me say no, my liege, an if you please:
    I only swore to study with your Grace,
    And stay here in your court for three years' space.
  LONGAVILLE. You swore to that, Berowne, and to the rest.
  BEROWNE. By yea and nay, sir, then I swore in jest.
    What is the end of study, let me know.
  KING. Why, that to know which else we should not know.
  BEROWNE. Things hid and barr'd, you mean, from common sense?
  KING. Ay, that is study's god-like recompense.
  BEROWNE. Come on, then; I will swear to study so,
    To know the thing I am forbid to know,
    As thus: to study where I well may dine,
    When I to feast expressly am forbid;
    Or study where to meet some mistress fine,
    When mistresses from common sense are hid;
    Or, having sworn too hard-a-keeping oath,
    Study to break it, and not break my troth.
    If study's gain be thus, and this be so,
    Study knows that which yet it doth not know.
    Swear me to this, and I will ne'er say no.
  KING. These be the stops that hinder study quite,
    And train our intellects to vain delight.
  BEROWNE. Why, all delights are vain; but that most vain
    Which, with pain purchas'd, doth inherit pain,
    As painfully to pore upon a book
    To seek the light of truth; while truth the while
    Doth falsely blind the eyesight of his look.
    Light, seeking light, doth light of light beguile;
    So, ere you find where light in darkness lies,
    Your light grows dark by losing of your eyes.
    Study me how to please the eye indeed,
    By fixing it upon a fairer eye;
    Who dazzling so, that eye shall be his heed,
    And give him light that it was blinded by.
    Study is like the heaven's glorious sun,
    That will not be deep-search'd with saucy looks;
    Small have continual plodders ever won,
    Save base authority from others' books.
    These earthly godfathers of heaven's lights
    That give a name to every fixed star
    Have no more profit of their shining nights
    Than those that walk and wot not what they are.
    Too much to know is to know nought but fame;
    And every godfather can give a name.
  KING. How well he's read, to reason against reading!
  DUMAIN. Proceeded well, to stop all good proceeding!
  LONGAVILLE. He weeds the corn, and still lets grow the weeding.
  BEROWNE. The spring is near, when green geese are a-breeding.
  DUMAIN. How follows that?
  BEROWNE. Fit in his place and time.
  DUMAIN. In reason nothing.
  BEROWNE. Something then in rhyme.
  LONGAVILLE. Berowne is like an envious sneaping frost
    That bites the first-born infants of the spring.
  BEROWNE. Well, say I am; why should proud summer boast
    Before the birds have any cause to sing?
    Why should I joy in any abortive birth?
    At Christmas I no more desire a rose
    Than wish a snow in May's new-fangled shows;
    But like of each thing that in season grows;
    So you, to study now it is too late,
    Climb o'er the house to unlock the little gate.
  KING. Well, sit out; go home, Berowne; adieu.
  BEROWNE. No, my good lord; I have sworn to stay with you;
    And though I have for barbarism spoke more
    Than for that angel knowledge you can say,
    Yet confident I'll keep what I have swore,
    And bide the penance of each three years' day.
    Give me the paper; let me read the same;
    And to the strictest decrees I'll write my name.
  KING. How well this yielding rescues thee from shame!
  BEROWNE. [Reads] 'Item. That no woman shall come within a mile of
    my court'- Hath this been proclaimed?
  LONGAVILLE. Four days ago.
  BEROWNE. Let's see the penalty. [Reads] '-on pain of losing her
    tongue.' Who devis'd this penalty?
  LONGAVILLE. Marry, that did I.
  BEROWNE. Sweet lord, and why?
  LONGAVILLE. To fright them hence with that dread penalty.
  BEROWNE. A dangerous law against gentility.
    [Reads] 'Item. If any man be seen to talk with a woman within
    the term of three years, he shall endure such public shame as the
    rest of the court can possibly devise.'
    This article, my liege, yourself must break;
    For well you know here comes in embassy
    The French king's daughter, with yourself to speak-
    A mild of grace and complete majesty-
    About surrender up of Aquitaine
    To her decrepit, sick, and bedrid father;
    Therefore this article is made in vain,
    Or vainly comes th' admired princess hither.
  KING. What say you, lords? Why, this was quite forgot.
  BEROWNE. So study evermore is over-shot.
    While it doth study to have what it would,
    It doth forget to do the thing it should;
    And when it hath the thing it hunteth most,
    'Tis won as towns with fire- so won, so lost.
  KING. We must of force dispense with this decree;
    She must lie here on mere necessity.
  BEROWNE. Necessity will make us all forsworn
    Three thousand times within this three years' space;
    For every man with his affects is born,
    Not by might mast'red, but by special grace.
    If I break faith, this word shall speak for me:
    I am forsworn on mere necessity.
    So to the laws at large I write my name;        [Subscribes]
    And he that breaks them in the least degree
    Stands in attainder of eternal shame.
    Suggestions are to other as to me;
    But I believe, although I seem so loath,
    I am the last that will last keep his oath.
    But is there no quick recreation granted?
  KING. Ay, that there is. Our court, you know, is haunted
    With a refined traveller of Spain,
    A man in all the world's new fashion planted,
    That hath a mint of phrases in his brain;
    One who the music of his own vain tongue
    Doth ravish like enchanting harmony;
    A man of complements, whom right and wrong
    Have chose as umpire of their mutiny.
    This child of fancy, that Armado hight,
    For interim to our studies shall relate,
    In high-born words, the worth of many a knight
    From tawny Spain lost in the world's debate.
    How you delight, my lords, I know not, I;
    But I protest I love to hear him lie,
    And I will use him for my minstrelsy.
  BEROWNE. Armado is a most illustrious wight,
    A man of fire-new words, fashion's own knight.
  LONGAVILLE. Costard the swain and he shall be our sport;
    And so to study three years is but short.

      Enter DULL, a constable, with a letter, and COSTARD

  DULL. Which is the Duke's own person?
  BEROWNE. This, fellow. What wouldst?
  DULL. I myself reprehend his own person, for I am his Grace's
    farborough; but I would see his own person in flesh and blood.
  BEROWNE. This is he.
  DULL. Signior Arme- Arme- commends you. There's villainy abroad;
    this letter will tell you more.
  COSTARD. Sir, the contempts thereof are as touching me.
  KING. A letter from the magnificent Armado.
  BEROWNE. How low soever the matter, I hope in God for high words.
  LONGAVILLE. A high hope for a low heaven. God grant us patience!
  BEROWNE. To hear, or forbear hearing?
  LONGAVILLE. To hear meekly, sir, and to laugh moderately; or, to
    forbear both.
  BEROWNE. Well, sir, be it as the style shall give us cause to climb
    in the merriness.
  COSTARD. The matter is to me, sir, as concerning Jaquenetta.
    The manner of it is, I was taken with the manner.
  BEROWNE. In what manner?
  COSTARD. In manner and form following, sir; all those three: I was
    seen with her in the manor-house, sitting with her upon the form,
    and taken following her into the park; which, put together, is in
    manner and form following. Now, sir, for the manner- it is the
    manner of a man to speak to a woman. For the form- in some form.
  BEROWNE. For the following, sir?
  COSTARD. As it shall follow in my correction; and God defend the
    right!
  KING. Will you hear this letter with attention?
  BEROWNE. As we would hear an oracle.
  COSTARD. Such is the simplicity of man to hearken after the flesh.
  KING. [Reads] 'Great deputy, the welkin's vicegerent and sole
    dominator of Navarre, my soul's earth's god and body's fost'ring
    patron'-
  COSTARD. Not a word of Costard yet.
  KING. [Reads] 'So it is'-
  COSTARD. It may be so; but if he say it is so, he is, in telling
    true, but so.
  KING. Peace!
  COSTARD. Be to me, and every man that dares not fight!
  KING. No words!
  COSTARD. Of other men's secrets, I beseech you.
  KING. [Reads] 'So it is, besieged with sable-coloured melancholy, I
    did commend the black oppressing humour to the most wholesome
    physic of thy health-giving air; and, as I am a gentleman, betook
    myself to walk. The time When? About the sixth hour; when beasts
    most graze, birds best peck, and men sit down to that nourishment
    which is called supper. So much for the time When. Now for the
    ground Which? which, I mean, I upon; it is ycleped thy park. Then
    for the place Where? where, I mean, I did encounter that obscene
    and most prepost'rous event that draweth from my snow-white pen
    the ebon-coloured ink which here thou viewest, beholdest,
    surveyest, or seest. But to the place Where? It standeth
    north-north-east and by east from the west corner of thy
    curious-knotted garden. There did I see that low-spirited swain,
    that base minnow of thy mirth,'
  COSTARD. Me?
  KING. 'that unlettered small-knowing soul,'
  COSTARD. Me?
  KING. 'that shallow vassal,'
  COSTARD. Still me?
  KING. 'which, as I remember, hight Costard,'
  COSTARD. O, me!
  KING. 'sorted and consorted, contrary to thy established proclaimed
    edict and continent canon; which, with, O, with- but with this I
    passion to say wherewith-'
  COSTARD. With a wench.
    King. 'with a child of our grandmother Eve, a female; or, for thy
    more sweet understanding, a woman. Him I, as my ever-esteemed
    duty pricks me on, have sent to thee, to receive the meed of
    punishment, by thy sweet Grace's officer, Antony Dull, a man of
    good repute, carriage, bearing, and estimation.'
  DULL. Me, an't shall please you; I am Antony Dull.
  KING. 'For Jaquenetta- so is the weaker vessel called, which I
    apprehended with the aforesaid swain- I keep her as a vessel of
    thy law's fury; and shall, at the least of thy sweet notice,
    bring her to trial. Thine, in all compliments of devoted and
    heart-burning heat of duty,
                                         DON ADRIANO DE ARMADO.'

  BEROWNE. This is not so well as I look'd for, but the best that
    ever I heard.
  KING. Ay, the best for the worst. But, sirrah, what say you to
    this?
  COSTARD. Sir, I confess the wench.
  KING. Did you hear the proclamation?
  COSTARD. I do confess much of the hearing it, but little of the
    marking of it.
  KING. It was proclaimed a year's imprisonment to be taken with a
    wench.
  COSTARD. I was taken with none, sir; I was taken with a damsel.
  KING. Well, it was proclaimed damsel.
  COSTARD. This was no damsel neither, sir; she was a virgin.
  KING. It is so varied too, for it was proclaimed virgin.
  COSTARD. If it were, I deny her virginity; I was taken with a maid.
  KING. This 'maid' not serve your turn, sir.
  COSTARD. This maid will serve my turn, sir.
  KING. Sir, I will pronounce your sentence: you shall fast a week
    with bran and water.
  COSTARD. I had rather pray a month with mutton and porridge.
  KING. And Don Armado shall be your keeper.
    My Lord Berowne, see him delivered o'er;
    And go we, lords, to put in practice that
    Which each to other hath so strongly sworn.
                             Exeunt KING, LONGAVILLE, and DUMAIN
  BEROWNE. I'll lay my head to any good man's hat
    These oaths and laws will prove an idle scorn.
    Sirrah, come on.
  COSTARD. I suffer for the truth, sir; for true it is I was taken
    with Jaquenetta, and Jaquenetta is a true girl; and therefore
    welcome the sour cup of prosperity! Affliction may one day smile
    again; and till then, sit thee down, sorrow.
                                                          Exeunt




SCENE II.
The park

Enter ARMADO and MOTH, his page

  ARMADO. Boy, what sign is it when a man of great spirit grows
    melancholy?
  MOTH. A great sign, sir, that he will look sad.
  ARMADO. Why, sadness is one and the self-same thing, dear imp.
  MOTH. No, no; O Lord, sir, no!
  ARMADO. How canst thou part sadness and melancholy, my tender
    juvenal?
  MOTH. By a familiar demonstration of the working, my tough signior.
  ARMADO. Why tough signior? Why tough signior?
  MOTH. Why tender juvenal? Why tender juvenal?
  ARMADO. I spoke it, tender juvenal, as a congruent epitheton
    appertaining to thy young days, which we may nominate tender.
  MOTH. And I, tough signior, as an appertinent title to your old
    time, which we may name tough.
  ARMADO. Pretty and apt.
  MOTH. How mean you, sir? I pretty, and my saying apt? or I apt, and
    my saying pretty?
  ARMADO. Thou pretty, because little.
  MOTH. Little pretty, because little. Wherefore apt?
  ARMADO. And therefore apt, because quick.
  MOTH. Speak you this in my praise, master?
  ARMADO. In thy condign praise.
  MOTH. I will praise an eel with the same praise.
  ARMADO. that an eel is ingenious?
  MOTH. That an eel is quick.
  ARMADO. I do say thou art quick in answers; thou heat'st my blood.
  MOTH. I am answer'd, sir.
  ARMADO. I love not to be cross'd.
  MOTH. [Aside] He speaks the mere contrary: crosses love not him.
  ARMADO. I have promised to study three years with the Duke.
  MOTH. You may do it in an hour, sir.
  ARMADO. Impossible.
  MOTH. How many is one thrice told?
  ARMADO. I am ill at reck'ning; it fitteth the spirit of a tapster.
  MOTH. You are a gentleman and a gamester, sir.
  ARMADO. I confess both; they are both the varnish of a complete
    man.
  MOTH. Then I am sure you know how much the gross sum of deuce-ace
    amounts to.
  ARMADO. It doth amount to one more than two.
  MOTH. Which the base vulgar do call three.
  ARMADO. True.
  MOTH. Why, sir, is this such a piece of study? Now here is three
    studied ere ye'll thrice wink; and how easy it is to put 'years'
    to the word 'three,' and study three years in two words, the
    dancing horse will tell you.
  ARMADO. A most fine figure!
  MOTH. [Aside] To prove you a cipher.
  ARMADO. I will hereupon confess I am in love. And as it is base for
    a soldier to love, so am I in love with a base wench. If drawing
    my sword against the humour of affection would deliver me from
    the reprobate thought of it, I would take Desire prisoner, and
    ransom him to any French courtier for a new-devis'd curtsy. I
    think scorn to sigh; methinks I should out-swear Cupid. Comfort
    me, boy; what great men have been in love?
  MOTH. Hercules, master.
  ARMADO. Most sweet Hercules! More authority, dear boy, name more;
    and, sweet my child, let them be men of good repute and carriage.
  MOTH. Samson, master; he was a man of good carriage, great
    carriage, for he carried the town gates on his back like a
    porter; and he was in love.
  ARMADO. O well-knit Samson! strong-jointed Samson! I do excel thee
    in my rapier as much as thou didst me in carrying gates. I am in
    love too. Who was Samson's love, my dear Moth?
  MOTH. A woman, master.
  ARMADO. Of what complexion?
  MOTH. Of all the four, or the three, or the two, or one of the
    four.
  ARMADO. Tell me precisely of what complexion.
  MOTH. Of the sea-water green, sir.
  ARMADO. Is that one of the four complexions?
  MOTH. As I have read, sir; and the best of them too.
  ARMADO. Green, indeed, is the colour of lovers; but to have a love
    of that colour, methinks Samson had small reason for it. He
    surely affected her for her wit.
  MOTH. It was so, sir; for she had a green wit.
  ARMADO. My love is most immaculate white and red.
  MOTH. Most maculate thoughts, master, are mask'd under such
    colours.
  ARMADO. Define, define, well-educated infant.
  MOTH. My father's wit my mother's tongue assist me!
  ARMADO. Sweet invocation of a child; most pretty, and pathetical!
  MOTH.      If she be made of white and red,
               Her faults will ne'er be known;
             For blushing cheeks by faults are bred,
               And fears by pale white shown.
             Then if she fear, or be to blame,
               By this you shall not know;
             For still her cheeks possess the same
               Which native she doth owe.
    A dangerous rhyme, master, against the reason of white and red.
  ARMADO. Is there not a ballad, boy, of the King and the Beggar?
  MOTH. The world was very guilty of such a ballad some three ages
    since; but I think now 'tis not to be found; or if it were, it
    would neither serve for the writing nor the tune.
  ARMADO. I will have that subject newly writ o'er, that I may
    example my digression by some mighty precedent. Boy, I do love
    that country girl that I took in the park with the rational hind
    Costard; she deserves well.
  MOTH. [Aside] To be whipt; and yet a better love than my master.
  ARMADO. Sing, boy; my spirit grows heavy in love.
  MOTH. And that's great marvel, loving a light wench.
  ARMADO. I say, sing.
  MOTH. Forbear till this company be past.

                Enter DULL, COSTARD, and JAQUENETTA

  DULL. Sir, the Duke's pleasure is that you keep Costard safe; and
    you must suffer him to take no delight nor no penance; but 'a
    must fast three days a week. For this damsel, I must keep her at
    the park; she is allow'd for the day-woman. Fare you well.
  ARMADO. I do betray myself with blushing. Maid!
  JAQUENETTA. Man!
  ARMADO. I will visit thee at the lodge.
  JAQUENETTA. That's hereby.
  ARMADO. I know where it is situate.
  JAQUENETTA. Lord, how wise you are!
  ARMADO. I will tell thee wonders.
  JAQUENETTA. With that face?
  ARMADO. I love thee.
  JAQUENETTA. So I heard you say.
  ARMADO. And so, farewell.
  JAQUENETTA. Fair weather after you!
  DULL. Come, Jaquenetta, away.             Exit with JAQUENETTA
  ARMADO. Villain, thou shalt fast for thy offences ere thou be
    pardoned.
  COSTARD. Well, sir, I hope when I do it I shall do it on a full
    stomach.
  ARMADO. Thou shalt be heavily punished.
  COSTARD. I am more bound to you than your fellows, for they are but
    lightly rewarded.
  ARMADO. Take away this villain; shut him up.
  MOTH. Come, you transgressing slave, away.
  COSTARD. Let me not be pent up, sir; I will fast, being loose.
  MOTH. No, sir; that were fast, and loose. Thou shalt to prison.
  COSTARD. Well, if ever I do see the merry days of desolation that I
    have seen, some shall see.
  MOTH. What shall some see?
  COSTARD. Nay, nothing, Master Moth, but what they look upon. It is
    not for prisoners to be too silent in their words, and therefore
    I will say nothing. I thank God I have as little patience as
    another man, and therefore I can be quiet.
                                         Exeunt MOTH and COSTARD
  ARMADO. I do affect the very ground, which is base, where her shoe,
    which is baser, guided by her foot, which is basest, doth tread.
    I shall be forsworn- which is a great argument of falsehood- if I
    love. And how can that be true love which is falsely attempted?
    Love is a familiar; Love is a devil. There is no evil angel but
    Love. Yet was Samson so tempted, and he had an excellent
    strength; yet was Solomon so seduced, and he had a very good wit.
    Cupid's butt-shaft is too hard for Hercules' club, and therefore
    too much odds for a Spaniard's rapier. The first and second cause
    will not serve my turn; the passado he respects not, the duello
    he regards not; his disgrace is to be called boy, but his glory
    is to subdue men. Adieu, valour; rust, rapier; be still, drum;
    for your manager is in love; yea, he loveth. Assist me, some
    extemporal god of rhyme, for I am sure I shall turn sonnet.
    Devise, wit; write, pen; for I am for whole volumes in folio.
 Exit




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT II. SCENE II.
The park

Enter the PRINCESS OF FRANCE, with three attending ladies,
ROSALINE, MARIA, KATHARINE, BOYET, and two other LORDS

  BOYET. Now, madam, summon up your dearest spirits.
    Consider who the King your father sends,
    To whom he sends, and what's his embassy:
    Yourself, held precious in the world's esteem,
    To parley with the sole inheritor
    Of all perfections that a man may owe,
    Matchless Navarre; the plea of no less weight
    Than Aquitaine, a dowry for a queen.
    Be now as prodigal of all dear grace
    As Nature was in making graces dear,
    When she did starve the general world beside
    And prodigally gave them all to you.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Good Lord Boyet, my beauty, though but mean,
    Needs not the painted flourish of your praise.
    Beauty is bought by judgment of the eye,
    Not utt'red by base sale of chapmen's tongues;
    I am less proud to hear you tell my worth
    Than you much willing to be counted wise
    In spending your wit in the praise of mine.
    But now to task the tasker: good Boyet,
    You are not ignorant all-telling fame
    Doth noise abroad Navarre hath made a vow,
    Till painful study shall outwear three years,
    No woman may approach his silent court.
    Therefore to's seemeth it a needful course,
    Before we enter his forbidden gates,
    To know his pleasure; and in that behalf,
    Bold of your worthiness, we single you
    As our best-moving fair solicitor.
    Tell him the daughter of the King of France,
    On serious business, craving quick dispatch,
    Importunes personal conference with his Grace.
    Haste, signify so much; while we attend,
    Like humble-visag'd suitors, his high will.
  BOYET. Proud of employment, willingly I go.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. All pride is willing pride, and yours is so.
                                                      Exit BOYET
    Who are the votaries, my loving lords,
    That are vow-fellows with this virtuous duke?
  FIRST LORD. Lord Longaville is one.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Know you the man?
  MARIA. I know him, madam; at a marriage feast,
    Between Lord Perigort and the beauteous heir
    Of Jaques Falconbridge, solemnized
    In Normandy, saw I this Longaville.
    A man of sovereign parts, peerless esteem'd,
    Well fitted in arts, glorious in arms;
    Nothing becomes him ill that he would well.
    The only soil of his fair virtue's gloss,
    If virtue's gloss will stain with any soil,
    Is a sharp wit match'd with too blunt a will,
    Whose edge hath power to cut, whose will still wills
    It should none spare that come within his power.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Some merry mocking lord, belike; is't so?
  MARIA. They say so most that most his humours know.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Such short-liv'd wits do wither as they grow.
    Who are the rest?
  KATHARINE. The young Dumain, a well-accomplish'd youth,
    Of all that virtue love for virtue loved;
    Most power to do most harm, least knowing ill,
    For he hath wit to make an ill shape good,
    And shape to win grace though he had no wit.
    I saw him at the Duke Alencon's once;
    And much too little of that good I saw
    Is my report to his great worthiness.
  ROSALINE. Another of these students at that time
    Was there with him, if I have heard a truth.
    Berowne they call him; but a merrier man,
    Within the limit of becoming mirth,
    I never spent an hour's talk withal.
    His eye begets occasion for his wit,
    For every object that the one doth catch
    The other turns to a mirth-moving jest,
    Which his fair tongue, conceit's expositor,
    Delivers in such apt and gracious words
    That aged ears play truant at his tales,
    And younger hearings are quite ravished;
    So sweet and voluble is his discourse.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. God bless my ladies! Are they all in love,
    That every one her own hath garnished
    With such bedecking ornaments of praise?
  FIRST LORD. Here comes Boyet.

                       Re-enter BOYET

  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Now, what admittance, lord?
  BOYET. Navarre had notice of your fair approach,
    And he and his competitors in oath
    Were all address'd to meet you, gentle lady,
    Before I came. Marry, thus much I have learnt:
    He rather means to lodge you in the field,
    Like one that comes here to besiege his court,
    Than seek a dispensation for his oath,
    To let you enter his unpeopled house.
                                    [The LADIES-IN-WAITING mask]

             Enter KING, LONGAVILLE, DUMAIN, BEROWNE,
                         and ATTENDANTS

    Here comes Navarre.
  KING. Fair Princess, welcome to the court of Navarre.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. 'Fair' I give you back again; and 'welcome' I
    have not yet. The roof of this court is too high to be yours, and
    welcome to the wide fields too base to be mine.
  KING. You shall be welcome, madam, to my court.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. I will be welcome then; conduct me thither.
  KING. Hear me, dear lady: I have sworn an oath-
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Our Lady help my lord! He'll be forsworn.
  KING. Not for the world, fair madam, by my will.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Why, will shall break it; will, and nothing
    else.
  KING. Your ladyship is ignorant what it is.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Were my lord so, his ignorance were wise,
    Where now his knowledge must prove ignorance.
    I hear your Grace hath sworn out house-keeping.
    'Tis deadly sin to keep that oath, my lord,
    And sin to break it.
    But pardon me, I am too sudden bold;
    To teach a teacher ill beseemeth me.
    Vouchsafe to read the purpose of my coming,
    And suddenly resolve me in my suit.         [Giving a paper]
  KING. Madam, I will, if suddenly I may.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. YOU Will the sooner that I were away,
    For you'll prove perjur'd if you make me stay.
  BEROWNE. Did not I dance with you in Brabant once?
  KATHARINE. Did not I dance with you in Brabant once?
  BEROWNE. I know you did.
  KATHARINE. How needless was it then to ask the question!
  BEROWNE. You must not be so quick.
  KATHARINE. 'Tis long of you, that spur me with such questions.
  BEROWNE. Your wit 's too hot, it speeds too fast, 'twill tire.
  KATHARINE. Not till it leave the rider in the mire.
  BEROWNE. What time o' day?
  KATHARINE. The hour that fools should ask.
  BEROWNE. Now fair befall your mask!
  KATHARINE. Fair fall the face it covers!
  BEROWNE. And send you many lovers!
  KATHARINE. Amen, so you be none.
  BEROWNE. Nay, then will I be gone.
  KING. Madam, your father here doth intimate
    The payment of a hundred thousand crowns;
    Being but the one half of an entire sum
    Disbursed by my father in his wars.
    But say that he or we, as neither have,
    Receiv'd that sum, yet there remains unpaid
    A hundred thousand more, in surety of the which,
    One part of Aquitaine is bound to us,
    Although not valued to the money's worth.
    If then the King your father will restore
    But that one half which is unsatisfied,
    We will give up our right in Aquitaine,
    And hold fair friendship with his Majesty.
    But that, it seems, he little purposeth,
    For here he doth demand to have repaid
    A hundred thousand crowns; and not demands,
    On payment of a hundred thousand crowns,
    To have his title live in Aquitaine;
    Which we much rather had depart withal,
    And have the money by our father lent,
    Than Aquitaine so gelded as it is.
    Dear Princess, were not his requests so far
    From reason's yielding, your fair self should make
    A yielding 'gainst some reason in my breast,
    And go well satisfied to France again.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. You do the King my father too much wrong,
    And wrong the reputation of your name,
    In so unseeming to confess receipt
    Of that which hath so faithfully been paid.
  KING. I do protest I never heard of it;
    And, if you prove it, I'll repay it back
    Or yield up Aquitaine.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. We arrest your word.
    Boyet, you can produce acquittances
    For such a sum from special officers
    Of Charles his father.
  KING. Satisfy me so.
  BOYET. So please your Grace, the packet is not come,
    Where that and other specialties are bound;
    To-morrow you shall have a sight of them.
  KING. It shall suffice me; at which interview
    All liberal reason I will yield unto.
    Meantime receive such welcome at my hand
    As honour, without breach of honour, may
    Make tender of to thy true worthiness.
    You may not come, fair Princess, within my gates;
    But here without you shall be so receiv'd
    As you shall deem yourself lodg'd in my heart,
    Though so denied fair harbour in my house.
    Your own good thoughts excuse me, and farewell.
    To-morrow shall we visit you again.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Sweet health and fair desires consort your
    Grace!
  KING. Thy own wish wish I thee in every place.
                                            Exit with attendants
  BEROWNE. Lady, I will commend you to mine own heart.
  ROSALINE. Pray you, do my commendations;
    I would be glad to see it.
  BEROWNE. I would you heard it groan.
  ROSALINE. Is the fool sick?
  BEROWNE. Sick at the heart.
  ROSALINE. Alack, let it blood.
  BEROWNE. Would that do it good?
  ROSALINE. My physic says 'ay.'
  BEROWNE. Will YOU prick't with your eye?
  ROSALINE. No point, with my knife.
  BEROWNE. Now, God save thy life!
  ROSALINE. And yours from long living!
  BEROWNE. I cannot stay thanksgiving.                [Retiring]
  DUMAIN. Sir, I pray you, a word: what lady is that same?
  BOYET. The heir of Alencon, Katharine her name.
  DUMAIN. A gallant lady! Monsieur, fare you well.          Exit
  LONGAVILLE. I beseech you a word: what is she in the white?
  BOYET. A woman sometimes, an you saw her in the light.
  LONGAVILLE. Perchance light in the light. I desire her name.
  BOYET. She hath but one for herself; to desire that were a shame.
  LONGAVILLE. Pray you, sir, whose daughter?
  BOYET. Her mother's, I have heard.
  LONGAVILLE. God's blessing on your beard!
  BOYET. Good sir, be not offended;
    She is an heir of Falconbridge.
  LONGAVILLE. Nay, my choler is ended.
    She is a most sweet lady.
  BOYET. Not unlike, sir; that may be.           Exit LONGAVILLE
  BEROWNE. What's her name in the cap?
  BOYET. Rosaline, by good hap.
  BEROWNE. Is she wedded or no?
  BOYET. To her will, sir, or so.
  BEROWNE. You are welcome, sir; adieu!
  BOYET. Farewell to me, sir, and welcome to you.
                                     Exit BEROWNE. LADIES Unmask
  MARIA. That last is Berowne, the merry mad-cap lord;
    Not a word with him but a jest.
  BOYET. And every jest but a word.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. It was well done of you to take him at his
    word.
  BOYET. I was as willing to grapple as he was to board.
  KATHARINE. Two hot sheeps, marry!
  BOYET. And wherefore not ships?
    No sheep, sweet lamb, unless we feed on your lips.
  KATHARINE. You sheep and I pasture- shall that finish the jest?
  BOYET. So you grant pasture for me.     [Offering to kiss her]
  KATHARINE. Not so, gentle beast;
    My lips are no common, though several they be.
  BOYET. Belonging to whom?
  KATHARINE. To my fortunes and me.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Good wits will be jangling; but, gentles,
      agree;
    This civil war of wits were much better used
    On Navarre and his book-men, for here 'tis abused.
  BOYET. If my observation, which very seldom lies,
    By the heart's still rhetoric disclosed with eyes,
    Deceive me not now, Navarre is infected.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. With what?
  BOYET. With that which we lovers entitle 'affected.'
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Your reason?
  BOYET. Why, all his behaviours did make their retire
    To the court of his eye, peeping thorough desire.
    His heart, like an agate, with your print impressed,
    Proud with his form, in his eye pride expressed;
    His tongue, all impatient to speak and not see,
    Did stumble with haste in his eyesight to be;
    All senses to that sense did make their repair,
    To feel only looking on fairest of fair.
    Methought all his senses were lock'd in his eye,
    As jewels in crystal for some prince to buy;
    Who, tend'ring their own worth from where they were glass'd,
    Did point you to buy them, along as you pass'd.
    His face's own margent did quote such amazes
    That all eyes saw his eyes enchanted with gazes.
    I'll give you Aquitaine and all that is his,
    An you give him for my sake but one loving kiss.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Come, to our pavilion. Boyet is dispos'd.
  BOYET. But to speak that in words which his eye hath disclos'd;
    I only have made a mouth of his eye,
    By adding a tongue which I know will not lie.
  MARIA. Thou art an old love-monger, and speakest skilfully.
  KATHARINE. He is Cupid's grandfather, and learns news of him.
  ROSALINE. Then was Venus like her mother; for her father is but
    grim.
  BOYET. Do you hear, my mad wenches?
  MARIA. No.
  BOYET. What, then; do you see?
  MARIA. Ay, our way to be gone.
  BOYET. You are too hard for me.                         Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT III. SCENE I.
The park

Enter ARMADO and MOTH

  ARMADO. Warble, child; make passionate my sense of hearing.
                                         [MOTH sings Concolinel]
  ARMADO. Sweet air! Go, tenderness of years, take this key, give
    enlargement to the swain, bring him festinately hither; I must
    employ him in a letter to my love.
  MOTH. Master, will you win your love with a French brawl?
  ARMADO. How meanest thou? Brawling in French?
  MOTH. No, my complete master; but to jig off a tune at the tongue's
    end, canary to it with your feet, humour it with turning up your
    eyelids, sigh a note and sing a note, sometime through the
    throat, as if you swallowed love with singing love, sometime
    through the nose, as if you snuff'd up love by smelling love,
    with your hat penthouse-like o'er the shop of your eyes, with
    your arms cross'd on your thin-belly doublet, like a rabbit on a
    spit, or your hands in your pocket, like a man after the old
    painting; and keep not too long in one tune, but a snip and away.
    These are complements, these are humours; these betray nice
    wenches, that would be betrayed without these; and make them men
    of note- do you note me?- that most are affected to these.
  ARMADO. How hast thou purchased this experience?
  MOTH. By my penny of observation.
  ARMADO. But O- but O-
  MOTH. The hobby-horse is forgot.
  ARMADO. Call'st thou my love 'hobby-horse'?
  MOTH. No, master; the hobby-horse is but a colt, and your love
    perhaps a hackney. But have you forgot your love?
  ARMADO. Almost I had.
  MOTH. Negligent student! learn her by heart.
  ARMADO. By heart and in heart, boy.
  MOTH. And out of heart, master; all those three I will prove.
  ARMADO. What wilt thou prove?
  MOTH. A man, if I live; and this, by, in, and without, upon the
    instant. By heart you love her, because your heart cannot come by
    her; in heart you love her, because your heart is in love with
    her; and out of heart you love her, being out of heart that you
    cannot enjoy her.
  ARMADO. I am all these three.
  MOTH. And three times as much more, and yet nothing at all.
  ARMADO. Fetch hither the swain; he must carry me a letter.
  MOTH. A message well sympathiz'd- a horse to be ambassador for an
    ass.
  ARMADO. Ha, ha, what sayest thou?
  MOTH. Marry, sir, you must send the ass upon the horse, for he is
    very slow-gaited. But I go.
  ARMADO. The way is but short; away.
  MOTH. As swift as lead, sir.
  ARMADO. The meaning, pretty ingenious?
    Is not lead a metal heavy, dull, and slow?
  MOTH. Minime, honest master; or rather, master, no.
  ARMADO. I say lead is slow.
  MOTH. You are too swift, sir, to say so:
    Is that lead slow which is fir'd from a gun?
  ARMADO. Sweet smoke of rhetoric!
    He reputes me a cannon; and the bullet, that's he;
    I shoot thee at the swain.
  MOTH. Thump, then, and I flee.                            Exit
  ARMADO. A most acute juvenal; volable and free of grace!
    By thy favour, sweet welkin, I must sigh in thy face;
    Most rude melancholy, valour gives thee place.
    My herald is return'd.

                       Re-enter MOTH with COSTARD

  MOTH. A wonder, master! here's a costard broken in a shin.
  ARMADO. Some enigma, some riddle; come, thy l'envoy; begin.
  COSTARD. No egma, no riddle, no l'envoy; no salve in the mail, sir.
    O, sir, plantain, a plain plantain; no l'envoy, no l'envoy; no
    salve, sir, but a plantain!
  ARMADO. By virtue thou enforcest laughter; thy silly thought, my
    spleen; the heaving of my lungs provokes me to ridiculous
    smiling. O, pardon me, my stars! Doth the inconsiderate take
    salve for l'envoy, and the word 'l'envoy' for a salve?
  MOTH. Do the wise think them other? Is not l'envoy a salve?
  ARMADO. No, page; it is an epilogue or discourse to make plain
    Some obscure precedence that hath tofore been sain.
    I will example it:
           The fox, the ape, and the humble-bee,
           Were still at odds, being but three.
    There's the moral. Now the l'envoy.
  MOTH. I will add the l'envoy. Say the moral again.
  ARMADO.  The fox, the ape, and the humble-bee,
           Were still at odds, being but three.
  MOTH.    Until the goose came out of door,
           And stay'd the odds by adding four.
    Now will I begin your moral, and do you follow with my l'envoy.
           The fox, the ape, and the humble-bee,
           Were still at odds, being but three.
  ARMADO.  Until the goose came out of door,
           Staying the odds by adding four.
  MOTH. A good l'envoy, ending in the goose; would you desire more?
  COSTARD. The boy hath sold him a bargain, a goose, that's flat.
    Sir, your pennyworth is good, an your goose be fat.
    To sell a bargain well is as cunning as fast and loose;
    Let me see: a fat l'envoy; ay, that's a fat goose.
  ARMADO. Come hither, come hither. How did this argument begin?
  MOTH. By saying that a costard was broken in a shin.
    Then call'd you for the l'envoy.
  COSTARD. True, and I for a plantain. Thus came your argument in;
    Then the boy's fat l'envoy, the goose that you bought;
    And he ended the market.
  ARMADO. But tell me: how was there a costard broken in a shin?
  MOTH. I will tell you sensibly.
  COSTARD. Thou hast no feeling of it, Moth; I will speak that
      l'envoy.
    I, Costard, running out, that was safely within,
    Fell over the threshold and broke my shin.
  ARMADO. We will talk no more of this matter.
  COSTARD. Till there be more matter in the shin.
  ARMADO. Sirrah Costard. I will enfranchise thee.
  COSTARD. O, Marry me to one Frances! I smell some l'envoy, some
    goose, in this.
  ARMADO. By my sweet soul, I mean setting thee at liberty,
    enfreedoming thy person; thou wert immured, restrained,
    captivated, bound.
  COSTARD. True, true; and now you will be my purgation, and let me
    loose.
  ARMADO. I give thee thy liberty, set thee from durance; and, in
    lieu thereof, impose on thee nothing but this: bear this
    significant [giving a letter] to the country maid Jaquenetta;
    there is remuneration, for the best ward of mine honour is
    rewarding my dependents. Moth, follow.                  Exit
  MOTH. Like the sequel, I. Signior Costard, adieu.
  COSTARD. My sweet ounce of man's flesh, my incony Jew!
                                                       Exit MOTH
    Now will I look to his remuneration. Remuneration! O, that's the
    Latin word for three farthings. Three farthings- remuneration.
    'What's the price of this inkle?'- 'One penny.'- 'No, I'll give
    you a remuneration.' Why, it carries it. Remuneration! Why, it is
    a fairer name than French crown. I will never buy and sell out of
    this word.

                          Enter BEROWNE

  BEROWNE. My good knave Costard, exceedingly well met!
  COSTARD. Pray you, sir, how much carnation ribbon may a man buy for
    a remuneration?
  BEROWNE. What is a remuneration?
  COSTARD. Marry, sir, halfpenny farthing.
  BEROWNE. Why, then, three-farthing worth of silk.
  COSTARD. I thank your worship. God be wi' you!
  BEROWNE. Stay, slave; I must employ thee.
    As thou wilt win my favour, good my knave,
    Do one thing for me that I shall entreat.
  COSTARD. When would you have it done, sir?
  BEROWNE. This afternoon.
  COSTARD. Well, I will do it, sir; fare you well.
  BEROWNE. Thou knowest not what it is.
  COSTARD. I shall know, sir, when I have done it.
  BEROWNE. Why, villain, thou must know first.
  COSTARD. I will come to your worship to-morrow morning.
  BEROWNE. It must be done this afternoon.
    Hark, slave, it is but this:
    The Princess comes to hunt here in the park,
    And in her train there is a gentle lady;
    When tongues speak sweetly, then they name her name,
    And Rosaline they call her. Ask for her,
    And to her white hand see thou do commend
    This seal'd-up counsel. There's thy guerdon; go.
                                         [Giving him a shilling]
  COSTARD. Gardon, O sweet gardon! better than remuneration; a
    'leven-pence farthing better; most sweet gardon! I will do it,
    sir, in print. Gardon- remuneration!                    Exit
  BEROWNE. And I, forsooth, in love; I, that have been love's whip;
    A very beadle to a humorous sigh;
    A critic, nay, a night-watch constable;
    A domineering pedant o'er the boy,
    Than whom no mortal so magnificent!
    This wimpled, whining, purblind, wayward boy,
    This senior-junior, giant-dwarf, Dan Cupid;
    Regent of love-rhymes, lord of folded arms,
    Th' anointed sovereign of sighs and groans,
    Liege of all loiterers and malcontents,
    Dread prince of plackets, king of codpieces,
    Sole imperator, and great general
    Of trotting paritors. O my little heart!
    And I to be a corporal of his field,
    And wear his colours like a tumbler's hoop!
    What! I love, I sue, I seek a wife-
    A woman, that is like a German clock,
    Still a-repairing, ever out of frame,
    And never going aright, being a watch,
    But being watch'd that it may still go right!
    Nay, to be perjur'd, which is worst of all;
    And, among three, to love the worst of all,
    A whitely wanton with a velvet brow,
    With two pitch balls stuck in her face for eyes;
    Ay, and, by heaven, one that will do the deed,
    Though Argus were her eunuch and her guard.
    And I to sigh for her! to watch for her!
    To pray for her! Go to; it is a plague
    That Cupid will impose for my neglect
    Of his almighty dreadful little might.
    Well, I will love, write, sigh, pray, sue, and groan:
    Some men must love my lady, and some Joan.              Exit




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT IV. SCENE I.
The park

Enter the PRINCESS, ROSALINE, MARIA, KATHARINE, BOYET, LORDS, ATTENDANTS,
and a FORESTER

  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Was that the King that spurr'd his horse so
      hard
    Against the steep uprising of the hill?
  BOYET. I know not; but I think it was not he.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Whoe'er 'a was, 'a show'd a mounting mind.
    Well, lords, to-day we shall have our dispatch;
    On Saturday we will return to France.
    Then, forester, my friend, where is the bush
    That we must stand and play the murderer in?
  FORESTER. Hereby, upon the edge of yonder coppice;
    A stand where you may make the fairest shoot.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. I thank my beauty I am fair that shoot,
    And thereupon thou speak'st the fairest shoot.
  FORESTER. Pardon me, madam, for I meant not so.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. What, what? First praise me, and again say no?
    O short-liv'd pride! Not fair? Alack for woe!
  FORESTER. Yes, madam, fair.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Nay, never paint me now;
    Where fair is not, praise cannot mend the brow.
    Here, good my glass, take this for telling true:
                                             [ Giving him money]
    Fair payment for foul words is more than due.
  FORESTER. Nothing but fair is that which you inherit.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. See, see, my beauty will be sav'd by merit.
    O heresy in fair, fit for these days!
    A giving hand, though foul, shall have fair praise.
    But come, the bow. Now mercy goes to kill,
    And shooting well is then accounted ill;
    Thus will I save my credit in the shoot:
    Not wounding, pity would not let me do't;
    If wounding, then it was to show my skill,
    That more for praise than purpose meant to kill.
    And, out of question, so it is sometimes:
    Glory grows guilty of detested crimes,
    When, for fame's sake, for praise, an outward part,
    We bend to that the working of the heart;
    As I for praise alone now seek to spill
    The poor deer's blood that my heart means no ill.
  BOYET. Do not curst wives hold that self-sovereignty
    Only for praise sake, when they strive to be
    Lords o'er their lords?
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Only for praise; and praise we may afford
    To any lady that subdues a lord.

                       Enter COSTARD

  BOYET. Here comes a member of the commonwealth.
  COSTARD. God dig-you-den all! Pray you, which is the head lady?
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Thou shalt know her, fellow, by the rest that
    have no heads.
  COSTARD. Which is the greatest lady, the highest?
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. The thickest and the tallest.
  COSTARD. The thickest and the tallest! It is so; truth is truth.
    An your waist, mistress, were as slender as my wit,
    One o' these maids' girdles for your waist should be fit.
    Are not you the chief woman? You are the thickest here.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. What's your will, sir? What's your will?
  COSTARD. I have a letter from Monsieur Berowne to one
    Lady Rosaline.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. O, thy letter, thy letter! He's a good friend
      of mine.
    Stand aside, good bearer. Boyet, you can carve.
    Break up this capon.
  BOYET. I am bound to serve.
    This letter is mistook; it importeth none here.
    It is writ to Jaquenetta.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. We will read it, I swear.
    Break the neck of the wax, and every one give ear.
  BOYET. [Reads] 'By heaven, that thou art fair is most infallible;
    true that thou art beauteous; truth itself that thou art lovely.
    More fairer than fair, beautiful than beauteous, truer than truth
    itself, have commiseration on thy heroical vassal. The
    magnanimous and most illustrate king Cophetua set eye upon the
    pernicious and indubitate beggar Zenelophon; and he it was that
    might rightly say, 'Veni, vidi, vici'; which to annothanize in
    the vulgar,- O base and obscure vulgar!- videlicet, He came, saw,
    and overcame. He came, one; saw, two; overcame, three. Who came?-
    the king. Why did he come?- to see. Why did he see?-to overcome.
    To whom came he?- to the beggar. What saw he?- the beggar. Who
    overcame he?- the beggar. The conclusion is victory; on whose
    side?- the king's. The captive is enrich'd; on whose side?- the
    beggar's. The catastrophe is a nuptial; on whose side?- the
    king's. No, on both in one, or one in both. I am the king, for so
    stands the comparison; thou the beggar, for so witnesseth thy
    lowliness. Shall I command thy love? I may. Shall I enforce thy
    love? I could. Shall I entreat thy love? I will. What shalt thou
    exchange for rags?- robes, for tittles?- titles, for thyself?
    -me. Thus expecting thy reply, I profane my lips on thy foot, my
    eyes on thy picture, and my heart on thy every part.
                  Thine in the dearest design of industry,
                                           DON ADRIANO DE ARMADO.

    'Thus dost thou hear the Nemean lion roar
    'Gainst thee, thou lamb, that standest as his prey;
    Submissive fall his princely feet before,
    And he from forage will incline to play.
    But if thou strive, poor soul, what are thou then?
    Food for his rage, repasture for his den.'
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. What plume of feathers is he that indited this
      letter?
    What vane? What weathercock? Did you ever hear better?
  BOYET. I am much deceived but I remember the style.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Else your memory is bad, going o'er it
    erewhile.
  BOYET. This Armado is a Spaniard, that keeps here in court;
    A phantasime, a Monarcho, and one that makes sport
    To the Prince and his book-mates.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Thou fellow, a word.
    Who gave thee this letter?
  COSTARD. I told you: my lord.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. To whom shouldst thou give it?
  COSTARD. From my lord to my lady.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. From which lord to which lady?
  COSTARD. From my Lord Berowne, a good master of mine,
    To a lady of France that he call'd Rosaline.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Thou hast mistaken his letter. Come, lords,
      away.
    [To ROSALINE] Here, sweet, put up this; 'twill be thine another
      day.                             Exeunt PRINCESS and TRAIN
  BOYET. Who is the shooter? who is the shooter?
  ROSALINE. Shall I teach you to know?
  BOYET. Ay, my continent of beauty.
  ROSALINE. Why, she that bears the bow.
    Finely put off!
  BOYET. My lady goes to kill horns; but, if thou marry,
    Hang me by the neck, if horns that year miscarry.
    Finely put on!
  ROSALINE. Well then, I am the shooter.
  BOYET. And who is your deer?
  ROSALINE. If we choose by the horns, yourself come not near.
    Finely put on indeed!
  MARIA. You Still wrangle with her, Boyet, and she strikes at the
    brow.
  BOYET. But she herself is hit lower. Have I hit her now?
  ROSALINE. Shall I come upon thee with an old saying, that was a man
    when King Pepin of France was a little boy, as touching the hit
    it?
  BOYET. So I may answer thee with one as old, that was a woman when
    Queen Guinever of Britain was a little wench, as touching the hit
    it.
  ROSALINE. [Singing]
            Thou canst not hit it, hit it, hit it,
            Thou canst not hit it, my good man.
  BOYET.    An I cannot, cannot, cannot,
            An I cannot, another can.
                                   Exeunt ROSALINE and KATHARINE
  COSTARD. By my troth, most pleasant! How both did fit it!
  MARIA. A mark marvellous well shot; for they both did hit it.
  BOYET. A mark! O, mark but that mark! A mark, says my lady!
    Let the mark have a prick in't, to mete at, if it may be.
  MARIA. Wide o' the bow-hand! I' faith, your hand is out.
  COSTARD. Indeed, 'a must shoot nearer, or he'll ne'er hit the
    clout.
  BOYET. An if my hand be out, then belike your hand is in.
  COSTARD. Then will she get the upshoot by cleaving the pin.
  MARIA. Come, come, you talk greasily; your lips grow foul.
  COSTARD. She's too hard for you at pricks, sir; challenge her to
    bowl.
  BOYET. I fear too much rubbing; good-night, my good owl.
                                          Exeunt BOYET and MARIA
  COSTARD. By my soul, a swain, a most simple clown!
    Lord, Lord! how the ladies and I have put him down!
    O' my troth, most sweet jests, most incony vulgar wit!
    When it comes so smoothly off, so obscenely, as it were, so fit.
    Armado a th' t'one side- O, a most dainty man!
    To see him walk before a lady and to bear her fan!
    To see him kiss his hand, and how most sweetly 'a will swear!
    And his page a t' other side, that handful of wit!
    Ah, heavens, it is a most pathetical nit!
    Sola, sola!                                     Exit COSTARD




SCENE II.
The park

From the shooting within, enter HOLOFERNES, SIR NATHANIEL, and DULL

  NATHANIEL. Very reverent sport, truly; and done in the testimony of
    a good conscience.
  HOLOFERNES. The deer was, as you know, sanguis, in blood; ripe as
    the pomewater, who now hangeth like a jewel in the ear of caelo,
    the sky, the welkin, the heaven; and anon falleth like a crab on
    the face of terra, the soil, the land, the earth.
  NATHANIEL. Truly, Master Holofernes, the epithets are sweetly
    varied, like a scholar at the least; but, sir, I assure ye it was
    a buck of the first head.
  HOLOFERNES. Sir Nathaniel, haud credo.
  DULL. 'Twas not a haud credo; 'twas a pricket.
  HOLOFERNES. Most barbarous intimation! yet a kind of insinuation,
    as it were, in via, in way, of explication; facere, as it were,
    replication, or rather, ostentare, to show, as it were, his
    inclination, after his undressed, unpolished, uneducated,
    unpruned, untrained, or rather unlettered, or ratherest
    unconfirmed fashion, to insert again my haud credo for a deer.
  DULL. I Said the deer was not a haud credo; 'twas a pricket.
  HOLOFERNES. Twice-sod simplicity, bis coctus!
    O thou monster Ignorance, how deformed dost thou look!
  NATHANIEL. Sir, he hath never fed of the dainties that are bred in
      a book;
    He hath not eat paper, as it were; he hath not drunk ink; his
    intellect is not replenished; he is only an animal, only sensible
    in the duller parts;
    And such barren plants are set before us that we thankful should
      be-
    Which we of taste and feeling are- for those parts that do
      fructify in us more than he.
    For as it would ill become me to be vain, indiscreet, or a fool,
    So, were there a patch set on learning, to see him in a school.
    But, omne bene, say I, being of an old father's mind:
    Many can brook the weather that love not the wind.
  DULL. You two are book-men: can you tell me by your wit
    What was a month old at Cain's birth that's not five weeks old as
      yet?
  HOLOFERNES. Dictynna, goodman Dull; Dictynna, goodman Dull.
  DULL. What is Dictynna?
  NATHANIEL. A title to Phoebe, to Luna, to the moon.
  HOLOFERNES. The moon was a month old when Adam was no more,
    And raught not to five weeks when he came to five-score.
    Th' allusion holds in the exchange.
  DULL. 'Tis true, indeed; the collusion holds in the exchange.
  HOLOFERNES. God comfort thy capacity! I say th' allusion holds in
    the exchange.
  DULL. And I say the polusion holds in the exchange; for the moon is
    never but a month old; and I say, beside, that 'twas a pricket
    that the Princess kill'd.
  HOLOFERNES. Sir Nathaniel, will you hear an extemporal epitaph on
    the death of the deer? And, to humour the ignorant, call the deer
    the Princess kill'd a pricket.
  NATHANIEL. Perge, good Master Holofernes, perge, so it shall please
    you to abrogate scurrility.
  HOLOFERNES. I Will something affect the letter, for it argues
    facility.

    The preyful Princess pierc'd and prick'd a pretty pleasing
      pricket.
    Some say a sore; but not a sore till now made sore with shooting.
    The dogs did yell; put el to sore, then sorel jumps from thicket-
    Or pricket sore, or else sorel; the people fall a-hooting.
    If sore be sore, then L to sore makes fifty sores o' sorel.
    Of one sore I an hundred make by adding but one more L.

  NATHANIEL. A rare talent!
  DULL. [Aside] If a talent be a claw, look how he claws him with a
    talent.
  HOLOFERNES. This is a gift that I have, simple, simple; a foolish
    extravagant spirit, full of forms, figures, shapes, objects,
    ideas, apprehensions, motions, revolutions. These are begot in
    the ventricle of memory, nourish'd in the womb of pia mater, and
    delivered upon the mellowing of occasion. But the gift is good in
    those in whom it is acute, and I am thankful for it.
  NATHANIEL. Sir, I praise the Lord for you, and so may my
    parishioners; for their sons are well tutor'd by you, and their
    daughters profit very greatly under you. You are a good member of
    the commonwealth.
  HOLOFERNES. Mehercle, if their sons be ingenious, they shall want
    no instruction; if their daughters be capable, I will put it to
    them; but, vir sapit qui pauca loquitur. A soul feminine saluteth
    us.

                    Enter JAQUENETTA and COSTARD

  JAQUENETTA. God give you good morrow, Master Person.
  HOLOFERNES. Master Person, quasi pers-one. And if one should be
    pierc'd which is the one?
  COSTARD. Marry, Master Schoolmaster, he that is likest to a
    hogshead.
  HOLOFERNES. Piercing a hogshead! A good lustre of conceit in a turf
    of earth; fire enough for a flint, pearl enough for a swine; 'tis
    pretty; it is well.
  JAQUENETTA. Good Master Parson, be so good as read me this letter;
    it was given me by Costard, and sent me from Don Armado. I
    beseech you read it.
  HOLOFERNES. Fauste, precor gelida quando pecus omne sub umbra
    Ruminat-
    and so forth. Ah, good old Mantuan! I may speak of thee as
    the traveller doth of Venice:
                   Venetia, Venetia,
                   Chi non ti vede, non ti pretia.
    Old Mantuan, old Mantuan! Who understandeth thee not,
    loves thee not-
                      Ut, re, sol, la, mi, fa.
    Under pardon, sir, what are the contents? or rather as
    Horace says in his- What, my soul, verses?
  NATHANIEL. Ay, sir, and very learned.
  HOLOFERNES. Let me hear a staff, a stanze, a verse; lege, domine.
  NATHANIEL. [Reads] 'If love make me forsworn, how shall I swear to
      love?
    Ah, never faith could hold, if not to beauty vowed!
    Though to myself forsworn, to thee I'll faithful prove;
    Those thoughts to me were oaks, to thee like osiers bowed.
    Study his bias leaves, and makes his book thine eyes,
    Where all those pleasures live that art would comprehend.
    If knowledge be the mark, to know thee shall suffice;
    Well learned is that tongue that well can thee commend;
    All ignorant that soul that sees thee without wonder;
    Which is to me some praise that I thy parts admire.
    Thy eye Jove's lightning bears, thy voice his dreadful thunder,
    Which, not to anger bent, is music and sweet fire.
    Celestial as thou art, O, pardon love this wrong,
    That singes heaven's praise with such an earthly tongue.'
  HOLOFERNES. You find not the apostrophas, and so miss the accent:
    let me supervise the canzonet. Here are only numbers ratified;
    but, for the elegancy, facility, and golden cadence of poesy,
    caret. Ovidius Naso was the man. And why, indeed, 'Naso' but for
    smelling out the odoriferous flowers of fancy, the jerks of
    invention? Imitari is nothing: so doth the hound his master, the
    ape his keeper, the tired horse his rider. But, damosella virgin,
    was this directed to you?
  JAQUENETTA. Ay, sir, from one Monsieur Berowne, one of the strange
    queen's lords.
  HOLOFERNES. I will overglance the superscript: 'To the snow-white
    hand of the most beauteous Lady Rosaline.' I will look again on
    the intellect of the letter, for the nomination of the party
    writing to the person written unto: 'Your Ladyship's in all
    desired employment, Berowne.' Sir Nathaniel, this Berowne is one
    of the votaries with the King; and here he hath framed a letter
    to a sequent of the stranger queen's which accidentally, or by
    the way of progression, hath miscarried. Trip and go, my sweet;
    deliver this paper into the royal hand of the King; it may
    concern much. Stay not thy compliment; I forgive thy duty. Adieu.
  JAQUENETTA. Good Costard, go with me. Sir, God save your life!
  COSTARD. Have with thee, my girl.
                                   Exeunt COSTARD and JAQUENETTA
  NATHANIEL. Sir, you have done this in the fear of God, very
    religiously; and, as a certain father saith-
  HOLOFERNES. Sir, tell not me of the father; I do fear colourable
    colours. But to return to the verses: did they please you, Sir
    Nathaniel?
  NATHANIEL. Marvellous well for the pen.
  HOLOFERNES. I do dine to-day at the father's of a certain pupil of
    mine; where, if, before repast, it shall please you to gratify
    the table with a grace, I will, on my privilege I have with the
    parents of the foresaid child or pupil, undertake your ben
    venuto; where I will prove those verses to be very unlearned,
    neither savouring of poetry, wit, nor invention. I beseech your
    society.
  NATHANIEL. And thank you too; for society, saith the text, is the
    happiness of life.
  HOLOFERNES. And certes, the text most infallibly concludes it.
    [To DULL] Sir, I do invite you too; you shall not say me nay:
    pauca verba. Away; the gentles are at their game, and we will to
    our recreation.                                       Exeunt




SCENE III.
The park

Enter BEROWNE, with a paper his band, alone

  BEROWNE. The King he is hunting the deer: I am coursing myself.
    They have pitch'd a toil: I am tolling in a pitch- pitch that
    defiles. Defile! a foul word. Well, 'set thee down, sorrow!' for
    so they say the fool said, and so say I, and I am the fool. Well
    proved, wit. By the Lord, this love is as mad as Ajax: it kills
    sheep; it kills me- I a sheep. Well proved again o' my side. I
    will not love; if I do, hang me. I' faith, I will not. O, but her
    eye! By this light, but for her eye, I would not love her- yes,
    for her two eyes. Well, I do nothing in the world but lie, and
    lie in my throat. By heaven, I do love; and it hath taught me to
    rhyme, and to be melancholy; and here is part of my rhyme, and
    here my melancholy. Well, she hath one o' my sonnets already; the
    clown bore it, the fool sent it, and the lady hath it: sweet
    clown, sweeter fool, sweetest lady! By the world, I would not
    care a pin if the other three were in. Here comes one with a
    paper; God give him grace to groan!
                                            [Climbs into a tree]

                      Enter the KING, with a paper

  KING. Ay me!
  BEROWNE. Shot, by heaven! Proceed, sweet Cupid; thou hast thump'd
    him with thy bird-bolt under the left pap. In faith, secrets!
  KING. [Reads]
      'So sweet a kiss the golden sun gives not
      To those fresh morning drops upon the rose,
      As thy eye-beams, when their fresh rays have smote
      The night of dew that on my cheeks down flows;
      Nor shines the silver moon one half so bright
      Through the transparent bosom of the deep,
      As doth thy face through tears of mine give light.
      Thou shin'st in every tear that I do weep;
      No drop but as a coach doth carry thee;
      So ridest thou triumphing in my woe.
      Do but behold the tears that swell in me,
      And they thy glory through my grief will show.
      But do not love thyself; then thou wilt keep
      My tears for glasses, and still make me weep.
      O queen of queens! how far dost thou excel
      No thought can think nor tongue of mortal tell.'
    How shall she know my griefs? I'll drop the paper-
    Sweet leaves, shade folly. Who is he comes here?
                                                   [Steps aside]

                  Enter LONGAVILLE, with a paper

    What, Longaville, and reading! Listen, car.
  BEROWNE. Now, in thy likeness, one more fool appear!
  LONGAVILLE. Ay me, I am forsworn!
  BEROWNE. Why, he comes in like a perjure, wearing papers.
  KING. In love, I hope; sweet fellowship in shame!
  BEROWNE. One drunkard loves another of the name.
  LONGAVILLE. Am I the first that have been perjur'd so?
  BEROWNE. I could put thee in comfort: not by two that I know;
    Thou makest the triumviry, the corner-cap of society,
    The shape of Love's Tyburn that hangs up simplicity.
  LONGAVILLE. I fear these stubborn lines lack power to move.
    O sweet Maria, empress of my love!
    These numbers will I tear, and write in prose.
  BEROWNE. O, rhymes are guards on wanton Cupid's hose:
    Disfigure not his slop.
  LONGAVILLE. This same shall go.          [He reads the sonnet]
      'Did not the heavenly rhetoric of thine eye,
      'Gainst whom the world cannot hold argument,
      Persuade my heart to this false perjury?
      Vows for thee broke deserve not punishment.
      A woman I forswore; but I will prove,
      Thou being a goddess, I forswore not thee:
      My vow was earthly, thou a heavenly love;
      Thy grace being gain'd cures all disgrace in me.
      Vows are but breath, and breath a vapour is;
      Then thou, fair sun, which on my earth dost shine,
      Exhal'st this vapour-vow; in thee it is.
      If broken, then it is no fault of mine;
      If by me broke, what fool is not so wise
      To lose an oath to win a paradise?'
  BEROWNE. This is the liver-vein, which makes flesh a deity,
    A green goose a goddess- pure, pure idolatry.
    God amend us, God amend! We are much out o' th' way.

                      Enter DUMAIN, with a paper

  LONGAVILLE. By whom shall I send this?- Company! Stay.
                                                   [Steps aside]
  BEROWNE. 'All hid, all hid'- an old infant play.
    Like a demigod here sit I in the sky,
    And wretched fools' secrets heedfully o'er-eye.
    More sacks to the mill! O heavens, I have my wish!
    Dumain transformed! Four woodcocks in a dish!
  DUMAIN. O most divine Kate!
  BEROWNE. O most profane coxcomb!
  DUMAIN. By heaven, the wonder in a mortal eye!
  BEROWNE. By earth, she is not, corporal: there you lie.
  DUMAIN. Her amber hairs for foul hath amber quoted.
  BEROWNE. An amber-colour'd raven was well noted.
  DUMAIN. As upright as the cedar.
  BEROWNE. Stoop, I say;
    Her shoulder is with child.
  DUMAIN. As fair as day.
  BEROWNE. Ay, as some days; but then no sun must shine.
  DUMAIN. O that I had my wish!
  LONGAVILLE. And I had mine!
  KING. And I mine too,.good Lord!
  BEROWNE. Amen, so I had mine! Is not that a good word?
  DUMAIN. I would forget her; but a fever she
    Reigns in my blood, and will rememb'red be.
  BEROWNE. A fever in your blood? Why, then incision
    Would let her out in saucers. Sweet misprision!
  DUMAIN. Once more I'll read the ode that I have writ.
  BEROWNE. Once more I'll mark how love can vary wit.
  DUMAIN. [Reads]
        'On a day-alack the day!-
        Love, whose month is ever May,
        Spied a blossom passing fair
        Playing in the wanton air.
        Through the velvet leaves the wind,
        All unseen, can passage find;
        That the lover, sick to death,
        Wish'd himself the heaven's breath.
        "Air," quoth he "thy cheeks may blow;
        Air, would I might triumph so!
        But, alack, my hand is sworn
        Ne'er to pluck thee from thy thorn;
        Vow, alack, for youth unmeet,
        Youth so apt to pluck a sweet.
        Do not call it sin in me
        That I am forsworn for thee;
        Thou for whom Jove would swear
        Juno but an Ethiope were;
        And deny himself for Jove,
        Turning mortal for thy love."'
    This will I send; and something else more plain
    That shall express my true love's fasting pain.
    O, would the King, Berowne and Longaville,
    Were lovers too! Ill, to example ill,
    Would from my forehead wipe a perjur'd note;
    For none offend where all alike do dote.
  LONGAVILLE. [Advancing] Dumain, thy love is far from charity,
    That in love's grief desir'st society;
    You may look pale, but I should blush, I know,
    To be o'erheard and taken napping so.
  KING. [Advancing] Come, sir, you blush; as his, your case is such.
    You chide at him, offending twice as much:
    You do not love Maria! Longaville
    Did never sonnet for her sake compile;
    Nor never lay his wreathed arms athwart
    His loving bosom, to keep down his heart.
    I have been closely shrouded in this bush,
    And mark'd you both, and for you both did blush.
    I heard your guilty rhymes, observ'd your fashion,
    Saw sighs reek from you, noted well your passion.
    'Ay me!' says one. 'O Jove!' the other cries.
    One, her hairs were gold; crystal the other's eyes.
    [To LONGAVILLE] You would for paradise break faith and troth;
    [To Dumain] And Jove for your love would infringe an oath.
    What will Berowne say when that he shall hear
    Faith infringed which such zeal did swear?
    How will he scorn, how will he spend his wit!
    How will he triumph, leap, and laugh at it!
    For all the wealth that ever I did see,
    I would not have him know so much by me.
  BEROWNE. [Descending] Now step I forth to whip hypocrisy,
    Ah, good my liege, I pray thee pardon me.
    Good heart, what grace hast thou thus to reprove
    These worms for loving, that art most in love?
    Your eyes do make no coaches; in your tears
    There is no certain princess that appears;
    You'll not be perjur'd; 'tis a hateful thing;
    Tush, none but minstrels like of sonneting.
    But are you not ashamed? Nay, are you not,
    All three of you, to be thus much o'ershot?
    You found his mote; the King your mote did see;
    But I a beam do find in each of three.
    O, what a scene of fool'ry have I seen,
    Of sighs, of groans, of sorrow, and of teen!
    O, me, with what strict patience have I sat,
    To see a king transformed to a gnat!
    To see great Hercules whipping a gig,
    And profound Solomon to tune a jig,
    And Nestor play at push-pin with the boys,
    And critic Timon laugh at idle toys!
    Where lies thy grief, O, tell me, good Dumain?
    And, gentle Longaville, where lies thy pain?
    And where my liege's? All about the breast.
    A caudle, ho!
  KING. Too bitter is thy jest.
    Are we betrayed thus to thy over-view?
  BEROWNE. Not you by me, but I betrayed to you.
    I that am honest, I that hold it sin
    To break the vow I am engaged in;
    I am betrayed by keeping company
    With men like you, men of inconstancy.
    When shall you see me write a thing in rhyme?
    Or groan for Joan? or spend a minute's time
    In pruning me? When shall you hear that I
    Will praise a hand, a foot, a face, an eye,
    A gait, a state, a brow, a breast, a waist,
    A leg, a limb-
  KING. Soft! whither away so fast?
    A true man or a thief that gallops so?
  BEROWNE. I post from love; good lover, let me go.

                 Enter JAQUENETTA and COSTARD

  JAQUENETTA. God bless the King!
  KING. What present hast thou there?
  COSTARD. Some certain treason.
  KING. What makes treason here?
  COSTARD. Nay, it makes nothing, sir.
  KING. If it mar nothing neither,
    The treason and you go in peace away together.
  JAQUENETTA. I beseech your Grace, let this letter be read;
    Our person misdoubts it: 'twas treason, he said.
  KING. Berowne, read it over.        [BEROWNE reads the letter]
    Where hadst thou it?
  JAQUENETTA. Of Costard.
  KING. Where hadst thou it?
  COSTARD. Of Dun Adramadio, Dun Adramadio.
                                      [BEROWNE tears the letter]
  KING. How now! What is in you? Why dost thou tear it?
  BEROWNE. A toy, my liege, a toy! Your Grace needs not fear it.
  LONGAVILLE. It did move him to passion, and therefore let's hear
     it.
  DUMAIN. It is Berowne's writing, and here is his name.
                                       [Gathering up the pieces]
  BEROWNE. [ To COSTARD] Ah, you whoreson loggerhead, you were born
      to do me shame.
    Guilty, my lord, guilty! I confess, I confess.
  KING. What?
  BEROWNE. That you three fools lack'd me fool to make up the mess;
    He, he, and you- and you, my liege!- and I
    Are pick-purses in love, and we deserve to die.
    O, dismiss this audience, and I shall tell you more.
    DUMAIN. Now the number is even.
  BEROWNE. True, true, we are four.
    Will these turtles be gone?
  KING. Hence, sirs, away.
  COSTARD. Walk aside the true folk, and let the traitors stay.
                                   Exeunt COSTARD and JAQUENETTA
  BEROWNE. Sweet lords, sweet lovers, O, let us embrace!
    As true we are as flesh and blood can be.
    The sea will ebb and flow, heaven show his face;
    Young blood doth not obey an old decree.
    We cannot cross the cause why we were born,
    Therefore of all hands must we be forsworn.
  KING. What, did these rent lines show some love of thine?
  BEROWNE. 'Did they?' quoth you. Who sees the heavenly Rosaline
    That, like a rude and savage man of Inde
    At the first op'ning of the gorgeous east,
    Bows not his vassal head and, strucken blind,
    Kisses the base ground with obedient breast?
    What peremptory eagle-sighted eye
    Dares look upon the heaven of her brow
    That is not blinded by her majesty?
  KING. What zeal, what fury hath inspir'd thee now?
    My love, her mistress, is a gracious moon;
    She, an attending star, scarce seen a light.
  BEROWNE. My eyes are then no eyes, nor I Berowne.
    O, but for my love, day would turn to night!
    Of all complexions the cull'd sovereignty
    Do meet, as at a fair, in her fair cheek,
    Where several worthies make one dignity,
    Where nothing wants that want itself doth seek.
    Lend me the flourish of all gentle tongues-
    Fie, painted rhetoric! O, she needs it not!
    To things of sale a seller's praise belongs:
    She passes praise; then praise too short doth blot.
    A wither'd hermit, five-score winters worn,
    Might shake off fifty, looking in her eye.
    Beauty doth varnish age, as if new-born,
    And gives the crutch the cradle's infancy.
    O, 'tis the sun that maketh all things shine!
  KING. By heaven, thy love is black as ebony.
  BEROWNE. Is ebony like her? O wood divine!
    A wife of such wood were felicity.
    O, who can give an oath? Where is a book?
    That I may swear beauty doth beauty lack,
    If that she learn not of her eye to look.
    No face is fair that is not full so black.
  KING. O paradox! Black is the badge of hell,
    The hue of dungeons, and the school of night;
    And beauty's crest becomes the heavens well.
  BEROWNE. Devils soonest tempt, resembling spirits of light.
    O, if in black my lady's brows be deckt,
    It mourns that painting and usurping hair
    Should ravish doters with a false aspect;
    And therefore is she born to make black fair.
    Her favour turns the fashion of the days;
    For native blood is counted painting now;
    And therefore red that would avoid dispraise
    Paints itself black, to imitate her brow.
  DUMAIN. To look like her are chimney-sweepers black.
  LONGAVILLE. And since her time are colliers counted bright.
  KING. And Ethiopes of their sweet complexion crack.
  DUMAIN. Dark needs no candles now, for dark is light.
  BEROWNE. Your mistresses dare never come in rain
    For fear their colours should be wash'd away.
  KING. 'Twere good yours did; for, sir, to tell you plain,
    I'll find a fairer face not wash'd to-day.
  BEROWNE. I'll prove her fair, or talk till doomsday here.
  KING. No devil will fright thee then so much as she.
  DUMAIN. I never knew man hold vile stuff so dear.
  LONGAVILLE. Look, here's thy love: my foot and her face see.
                                              [Showing his shoe]
  BEROWNE. O, if the streets were paved with thine eyes,
    Her feet were much too dainty for such tread!
  DUMAIN. O vile! Then, as she goes, what upward lies
    The street should see as she walk'd overhead.
  KING. But what of this? Are we not all in love?
  BEROWNE. Nothing so sure; and thereby all forsworn.
  KING. Then leave this chat; and, good Berowne, now prove
    Our loving lawful, and our faith not torn.
  DUMAIN. Ay, marry, there; some flattery for this evil.
  LONGAVILLE. O, some authority how to proceed;
    Some tricks, some quillets, how to cheat the devil!
  DUMAIN. Some salve for perjury.
  BEROWNE. 'Tis more than need.
    Have at you, then, affection's men-at-arms.
    Consider what you first did swear unto:
    To fast, to study, and to see no woman-
    Flat treason 'gainst the kingly state of youth.
    Say, can you fast? Your stomachs are too young,
    And abstinence engenders maladies.
    And, where that you you have vow'd to study, lords,
    In that each of you have forsworn his book,
    Can you still dream, and pore, and thereon look?
    For when would you, my lord, or you, or you,
    Have found the ground of study's excellence
    Without the beauty of a woman's face?
    From women's eyes this doctrine I derive:
    They are the ground, the books, the academes,
    From whence doth spring the true Promethean fire.
    Why, universal plodding poisons up
    The nimble spirits in the arteries,
    As motion and long-during action tires
    The sinewy vigour of the traveller.
    Now, for not looking on a woman's face,
    You have in that forsworn the use of eyes,
    And study too, the causer of your vow;
    For where is author in the world
    Teaches such beauty as a woman's eye?
    Learning is but an adjunct to ourself,
    And where we are our learning likewise is;
    Then when ourselves we see in ladies' eyes,
    With ourselves.
    Do we not likewise see our learning there?
    O, we have made a vow to study, lords,
    And in that vow we have forsworn our books.
    For when would you, my liege, or you, or you,
    In leaden contemplation have found out
    Such fiery numbers as the prompting eyes
    Of beauty's tutors have enrich'd you with?
    Other slow arts entirely keep the brain;
    And therefore, finding barren practisers,
    Scarce show a harvest of their heavy toil;
    But love, first learned in a lady's eyes,
    Lives not alone immured in the brain,
    But with the motion of all elements
    Courses as swift as thought in every power,
    And gives to every power a double power,
    Above their functions and their offices.
    It adds a precious seeing to the eye:
    A lover's eyes will gaze an eagle blind.
    A lover's ear will hear the lowest sound,
    When the suspicious head of theft is stopp'd.
    Love's feeling is more soft and sensible
    Than are the tender horns of cockled snails:
    Love's tongue proves dainty Bacchus gross in taste.
    For valour, is not Love a Hercules,
    Still climbing trees in the Hesperides?
    Subtle as Sphinx; as sweet and musical
    As bright Apollo's lute, strung with his hair.
    And when Love speaks, the voice of all the gods
    Make heaven drowsy with the harmony.
    Never durst poet touch a pen to write
    Until his ink were temp'red with Love's sighs;
    O, then his lines would ravish savage ears,
    And plant in tyrants mild humility.
    From women's eyes this doctrine I derive.
    They sparkle still the right Promethean fire;
    They are the books, the arts, the academes,
    That show, contain, and nourish, all the world,
    Else none at all in aught proves excellent.
    Then fools you were these women to forswear;
    Or, keeping what is sworn, you will prove fools.
    For wisdom's sake, a word that all men love;
    Or for Love's sake, a word that loves all men;
    Or for men's sake, the authors of these women;
    Or women's sake, by whom we men are men-
    Let us once lose our oaths to find ourselves,
    Or else we lose ourselves to keep our oaths.
    It is religion to be thus forsworn;
    For charity itself fulfils the law,
    And who can sever love from charity?
  KING. Saint Cupid, then! and, soldiers, to the field!
  BEROWNE. Advance your standards, and upon them, lords;
    Pell-mell, down with them! be first advis'd,
    In conflict, that you get the sun of them.
  LONGAVILLE. Now to plain-dealing; lay these glozes by.
    Shall we resolve to woo these girls of France?
  KING. And win them too; therefore let us devise
    Some entertainment for them in their tents.
  BEROWNE. First, from the park let us conduct them thither;
    Then homeward every man attach the hand
    Of his fair mistress. In the afternoon
    We will with some strange pastime solace them,
    Such as the shortness of the time can shape;
    For revels, dances, masks, and merry hours,
    Forerun fair Love, strewing her way with flowers.
  KING. Away, away! No time shall be omitted
    That will betime, and may by us be fitted.
  BEROWNE. Allons! allons! Sow'd cockle reap'd no corn,
    And justice always whirls in equal measure.
    Light wenches may prove plagues to men forsworn;
    If so, our copper buys no better treasure.            Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT V. SCENE I.
The park

Enter HOLOFERNES, SIR NATHANIEL, and DULL

  HOLOFERNES. Satis quod sufficit.
  NATHANIEL. I praise God for you, sir. Your reasons at dinner have
    been sharp and sententious; pleasant without scurrility, witty
    without affection, audacious without impudency, learned without
    opinion, and strange without heresy. I did converse this quondam
    day with a companion of the King's who is intituled, nominated,
    or called, Don Adriano de Armado.
  HOLOFERNES. Novi hominem tanquam te. His humour is lofty, his
    discourse peremptory, his tongue filed, his eye ambitious, his
    gait majestical and his general behaviour vain, ridiculous, and
    thrasonical. He is too picked, too spruce, too affected, too odd,
    as it were, too peregrinate, as I may call it.
  NATHANIEL. A most singular and choice epithet.
                                      [Draws out his table-book]
  HOLOFERNES. He draweth out the thread of his verbosity finer than
    the staple of his argument. I abhor such fanatical phantasimes,
    such insociable and point-devise companions; such rackers of
    orthography, as to speak 'dout' fine, when he should say 'doubt';
    'det' when he should pronounce 'debt'- d, e, b, t, not d, e, t.
    He clepeth a calf 'cauf,' half 'hauf'; neighbour vocatur
    'nebour'; 'neigh' abbreviated 'ne.' This is abhominable- which he
    would call 'abbominable.' It insinuateth me of insanie: ne
    intelligis, domine? to make frantic, lunatic.
  NATHANIEL. Laus Deo, bone intelligo.
  HOLOFERNES. 'Bone'?- 'bone' for 'bene.' Priscian a little
    scratch'd; 'twill serve.

                 Enter ARMADO, MOTH, and COSTARD

  NATHANIEL. Videsne quis venit?
  HOLOFERNES. Video, et gaudeo.
  ARMADO. [To MOTH] Chirrah!
  HOLOFERNES. Quare 'chirrah,' not 'sirrah'?
  ARMADO. Men of peace, well encount'red.
  HOLOFERNES. Most military sir, salutation.
  MOTH. [Aside to COSTARD] They have been at a great feast of
    languages and stol'n the scraps.
  COSTARD. O, they have liv'd long on the alms-basket of words. I
    marvel thy master hath not eaten thee for a word, for thou are
    not so long by the head as honorificabilitudinitatibus; thou art
    easier swallowed than a flap-dragon.
  MOTH. Peace! the peal begins.
  ARMADO. [To HOLOFERNES] Monsieur, are you not lett'red?
  MOTH. Yes, yes; he teaches boys the hornbook. What is a, b, spelt
    backward with the horn on his head?
  HOLOFERNES. Ba, pueritia, with a horn added.
  MOTH. Ba, most silly sheep with a horn. You hear his learning.
  HOLOFERNES. Quis, quis, thou consonant?
  MOTH. The third of the five vowels, if You repeat them; or the
    fifth, if I.
  HOLOFERNES. I will repeat them: a, e, I-
  MOTH. The sheep; the other two concludes it: o, U.
  ARMADO. Now, by the salt wave of the Mediterraneum, a sweet touch,
    a quick venue of wit- snip, snap, quick and home. It rejoiceth my
    intellect. True wit!
  MOTH. Offer'd by a child to an old man; which is wit-old.
  HOLOFERNES. What is the figure? What is the figure?
  MOTH. Horns.
  HOLOFERNES. Thou disputes like an infant; go whip thy gig.
  MOTH. Lend me your horn to make one, and I will whip about your
    infamy circum circa- a gig of a cuckold's horn.
  COSTARD. An I had but one penny in the world, thou shouldst have it
    to buy ginger-bread. Hold, there is the very remuneration I had
    of thy master, thou halfpenny purse of wit, thou pigeon-egg of
    discretion. O, an the heavens were so pleased that thou wert but
    my bastard, what a joyful father wouldst thou make me! Go to;
    thou hast it ad dunghill, at the fingers' ends, as they say.
  HOLOFERNES. O, I smell false Latin; 'dunghill' for unguem.
  ARMADO. Arts-man, preambulate; we will be singuled from the
    barbarous. Do you not educate youth at the charge-house on the
    top of the mountain?
  HOLOFERNES. Or mons, the hill.
  ARMADO. At your sweet pleasure, for the mountain.
  HOLOFERNES. I do, sans question.
  ARMADO. Sir, it is the King's most sweet pleasure and affection to
    congratulate the Princess at her pavilion, in the posteriors of
    this day; which the rude multitude call the afternoon.
  HOLOFERNES. The posterior of the day, most generous sir, is liable,
    congruent, and measurable, for the afternoon. The word is well
    cull'd, chose, sweet, and apt, I do assure you, sir, I do assure.
  ARMADO. Sir, the King is a noble gentleman, and my familiar, I do
    assure ye, very good friend. For what is inward between us, let
    it pass. I do beseech thee, remember thy courtesy. I beseech
    thee, apparel thy head. And among other importunate and most
    serious designs, and of great import indeed, too- but let that
    pass; for I must tell thee it will please his Grace, by the
    world, sometime to lean upon my poor shoulder, and with his royal
    finger thus dally with my excrement, with my mustachio; but,
    sweet heart, let that pass. By the world, I recount no fable:
    some certain special honours it pleaseth his greatness to impart
    to Armado, a soldier, a man of travel, that hath seen the world;
    but let that pass. The very all of all is- but, sweet heart, I do
    implore secrecy- that the King would have me present the
    Princess, sweet chuck, with some delightful ostentation, or show,
    or pageant, or antic, or firework. Now, understanding that the
    curate and your sweet self are good at such eruptions and sudden
    breaking-out of mirth, as it were, I have acquainted you withal,
    to the end to crave your assistance.
  HOLOFERNES. Sir, you shall present before her the Nine Worthies.
    Sir Nathaniel, as concerning some entertainment of time, some
    show in the posterior of this day, to be rend'red by our
    assistance, the King's command, and this most gallant,
    illustrate, and learned gentleman, before the Princess- I say
    none so fit as to present the Nine Worthies.
  NATHANIEL. Where will you find men worthy enough to present them?
  HOLOFERNES. Joshua, yourself; myself, Alexander; this gallant
    gentleman, Judas Maccabaeus; this swain, because of his great
    limb or joint, shall pass Pompey the Great; the page, Hercules.
  ARMADO. Pardon, sir; error: he is not quantity enough for that
    Worthy's thumb; he is not so big as the end of his club.
  HOLOFERNES. Shall I have audience? He shall present Hercules in
    minority: his enter and exit shall be strangling a snake; and I
    will have an apology for that purpose.
  MOTH. An excellent device! So, if any of the audience hiss, you may
    cry 'Well done, Hercules; now thou crushest the snake!' That is
    the way to make an offence gracious, though few have the grace to
    do it.
  ARMADO. For the rest of the Worthies?
  HOLOFERNES. I will play three myself.
  MOTH. Thrice-worthy gentleman!
  ARMADO. Shall I tell you a thing?
  HOLOFERNES. We attend.
  ARMADO. We will have, if this fadge not, an antic. I beseech you,
    follow.
  HOLOFERNES. Via, goodman Dull! Thou has spoken no word all this
    while.
  DULL. Nor understood none neither, sir.
  HOLOFERNES. Allons! we will employ thee.
  DULL. I'll make one in a dance, or so, or I will play
    On the tabor to the Worthies, and let them dance the hay.
  HOLOFERNES. Most dull, honest Dull! To our sport, away.
                                                          Exeunt




SCENE II.
The park

Enter the PRINCESS, MARIA, KATHARINE, and ROSALINE

  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Sweet hearts, we shall be rich ere we depart,
    If fairings come thus plentifully in.
    A lady wall'd about with diamonds!
    Look you what I have from the loving King.
  ROSALINE. Madam, came nothing else along with that?
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Nothing but this! Yes, as much love in rhyme
    As would be cramm'd up in a sheet of paper
    Writ o' both sides the leaf, margent and all,
    That he was fain to seal on Cupid's name.
  ROSALINE. That was the way to make his godhead wax;
    For he hath been five thousand year a boy.
  KATHARINE. Ay, and a shrewd unhappy gallows too.
  ROSALINE. You'll ne'er be friends with him: 'a kill'd your sister.
  KATHARINE. He made her melancholy, sad, and heavy;
    And so she died. Had she been light, like you,
    Of such a merry, nimble, stirring spirit,
    She might 'a been a grandam ere she died.
    And so may you; for a light heart lives long.
  ROSALINE. What's your dark meaning, mouse, of this light word?
  KATHARINE. A light condition in a beauty dark.
  ROSALINE. We need more light to find your meaning out.
  KATHARINE. You'll mar the light by taking it in snuff;
    Therefore I'll darkly end the argument.
  ROSALINE. Look what you do, you do it still i' th' dark.
  KATHARINE. So do not you; for you are a light wench.
  ROSALINE. Indeed, I weigh not you; and therefore light.
  KATHARINE. You weigh me not? O, that's you care not for me.
  ROSALINE. Great reason; for 'past cure is still past care.'
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Well bandied both; a set of wit well play'd.
    But, Rosaline, you have a favour too?
    Who sent it? and what is it?
  ROSALINE. I would you knew.
    An if my face were but as fair as yours,
    My favour were as great: be witness this.
    Nay, I have verses too, I thank Berowne;
    The numbers true, and, were the numb'ring too,
    I were the fairest goddess on the ground.
    I am compar'd to twenty thousand fairs.
    O, he hath drawn my picture in his letter!
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Anything like?
  ROSALINE. Much in the letters; nothing in the praise.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Beauteous as ink- a good conclusion.
  KATHARINE. Fair as a text B in a copy-book.
  ROSALINE. Ware pencils, ho! Let me not die your debtor,
    My red dominical, my golden letter:
    O that your face were not so full of O's!
  KATHARINE. A pox of that jest! and I beshrew all shrows!
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. But, Katharine, what was sent to you from fair
    Dumain?
  KATHARINE. Madam, this glove.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Did he not send you twain?
  KATHARINE. Yes, madam; and, moreover,
    Some thousand verses of a faithful lover;
    A huge translation of hypocrisy,
    Vilely compil'd, profound simplicity.
  MARIA. This, and these pearl, to me sent Longaville;
    The letter is too long by half a mile.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. I think no less. Dost thou not wish in heart
    The chain were longer and the letter short?
  MARIA. Ay, or I would these hands might never part.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. We are wise girls to mock our lovers so.
  ROSALINE. They are worse fools to purchase mocking so.
    That same Berowne I'll torture ere I go.
    O that I knew he were but in by th' week!
    How I would make him fawn, and beg, and seek,
    And wait the season, and observe the times,
    And spend his prodigal wits in bootless rhymes,
    And shape his service wholly to my hests,
    And make him proud to make me proud that jests!
    So pertaunt-like would I o'ersway his state
    That he should be my fool, and I his fate.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. None are so surely caught, when they are
      catch'd,
    As wit turn'd fool; folly, in wisdom hatch'd,
    Hath wisdom's warrant and the help of school,
    And wit's own grace to grace a learned fool.
  ROSALINE. The blood of youth burns not with such excess
    As gravity's revolt to wantonness.
  MARIA. Folly in fools bears not so strong a note
    As fool'ry in the wise when wit doth dote,
    Since all the power thereof it doth apply
    To prove, by wit, worth in simplicity.

                          Enter BOYET

  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Here comes Boyet, and mirth is in his face.
  BOYET. O, I am stabb'd with laughter! Where's her Grace?
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Thy news, Boyet?
  BOYET. Prepare, madam, prepare!
    Arm, wenches, arm! Encounters mounted are
    Against your peace. Love doth approach disguis'd,
    Armed in arguments; you'll be surpris'd.
    Muster your wits; stand in your own defence;
    Or hide your heads like cowards, and fly hence.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Saint Dennis to Saint Cupid! What are they
    That charge their breath against us? Say, scout, say.
  BOYET. Under the cool shade of a sycamore
    I thought to close mine eyes some half an hour;
    When, lo, to interrupt my purpos'd rest,
    Toward that shade I might behold addrest
    The King and his companions; warily
    I stole into a neighbour thicket by,
    And overheard what you shall overhear-
    That, by and by, disguis'd they will be here.
    Their herald is a pretty knavish page,
    That well by heart hath conn'd his embassage.
    Action and accent did they teach him there:
    'Thus must thou speak' and 'thus thy body bear,'
    And ever and anon they made a doubt
    Presence majestical would put him out;
    'For' quoth the King 'an angel shalt thou see;
    Yet fear not thou, but speak audaciously.'
    The boy replied 'An angel is not evil;
    I should have fear'd her had she been a devil.'
    With that all laugh'd, and clapp'd him on the shoulder,
    Making the bold wag by their praises bolder.
    One rubb'd his elbow, thus, and fleer'd, and swore
    A better speech was never spoke before.
    Another with his finger and his thumb
    Cried 'Via! we will do't, come what will come.'
    The third he caper'd, and cried 'All goes well.'
    The fourth turn'd on the toe, and down he fell.
    With that they all did tumble on the ground,
    With such a zealous laughter, so profound,
    That in this spleen ridiculous appears,
    To check their folly, passion's solemn tears.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. But what, but what, come they to visit us?
  BOYET. They do, they do, and are apparell'd thus,
    Like Muscovites or Russians, as I guess.
    Their purpose is to parley, court, and dance;
    And every one his love-feat will advance
    Unto his several mistress; which they'll know
    By favours several which they did bestow.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. And will they so? The gallants shall be task'd,
    For, ladies, we will every one be mask'd;
    And not a man of them shall have the grace,
    Despite of suit, to see a lady's face.
    Hold, Rosaline, this favour thou shalt wear,
    And then the King will court thee for his dear;
    Hold, take thou this, my sweet, and give me thine,
    So shall Berowne take me for Rosaline.
    And change you favours too; so shall your loves
    Woo contrary, deceiv'd by these removes.
  ROSALINE. Come on, then, wear the favours most in sight.
  KATHARINE. But, in this changing, what is your intent?
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. The effect of my intent is to cross theirs.
    They do it but in mocking merriment,
    And mock for mock is only my intent.
    Their several counsels they unbosom shall
    To loves mistook, and so be mock'd withal
    Upon the next occasion that we meet
    With visages display'd to talk and greet.
  ROSALINE. But shall we dance, if they desire us to't?
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. No, to the death, we will not move a foot,
    Nor to their penn'd speech render we no grace;
    But while 'tis spoke each turn away her face.
  BOYET. Why, that contempt will kill the speaker's heart,
    And quite divorce his memory from his part.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Therefore I do it; and I make no doubt
    The rest will ne'er come in, if he be out.
    There's no such sport as sport by sport o'erthrown,
    To make theirs ours, and ours none but our own;
    So shall we stay, mocking intended game,
    And they well mock'd depart away with shame.
                                         [Trumpet sounds within]
  BOYET. The trumpet sounds; be mask'd; the maskers come.
                                               [The LADIES mask]

          Enter BLACKAMOORS music, MOTH as Prologue, the
     KING and his LORDS as maskers, in the guise of Russians

  MOTH. All hail, the richest heauties on the earth!
  BOYET. Beauties no richer than rich taffeta.
  MOTH. A holy parcel of the fairest dames
                            [The LADIES turn their backs to him]
    That ever turn'd their- backs- to mortal views!
  BEROWNE. Their eyes, villain, their eyes.
  MOTH. That ever turn'd their eyes to mortal views!
    Out-
  BOYET. True; out indeed.
  MOTH. Out of your favours, heavenly spirits, vouchsafe
    Not to behold-
  BEROWNE. Once to behold, rogue.
  MOTH. Once to behold with your sun-beamed eyes- with your
    sun-beamed eyes-
  BOYET. They will not answer to that epithet;
    You were best call it 'daughter-beamed eyes.'
  MOTH. They do not mark me, and that brings me out.
  BEROWNE. Is this your perfectness? Be gone, you rogue.
                                                       Exit MOTH
  ROSALINE. What would these strangers? Know their minds, Boyet.
    If they do speak our language, 'tis our will
    That some plain man recount their purposes.
    Know what they would.
  BOYET. What would you with the Princess?
  BEROWNE. Nothing but peace and gentle visitation.
  ROSALINE. What would they, say they?
  BOYET. Nothing but peace and gentle visitation.
  ROSALINE. Why, that they have; and bid them so be gone.
  BOYET. She says you have it, and you may be gone.
  KING. Say to her we have measur'd many miles
    To tread a measure with her on this grass.
  BOYET. They say that they have measur'd many a mile
    To tread a measure with you on this grass.
  ROSALINE. It is not so. Ask them how many inches
    Is in one mile? If they have measured many,
    The measure, then, of one is eas'ly told.
  BOYET. If to come hither you have measur'd miles,
    And many miles, the Princess bids you tell
    How many inches doth fill up one mile.
  BEROWNE. Tell her we measure them by weary steps.
  BOYET. She hears herself.
  ROSALINE. How many weary steps
    Of many weary miles you have o'ergone
    Are numb'red in the travel of one mile?
  BEROWNE. We number nothing that we spend for you;
    Our duty is so rich, so infinite,
    That we may do it still without accompt.
    Vouchsafe to show the sunshine of your face,
    That we, like savages, may worship it.
  ROSALINE. My face is but a moon, and clouded too.
  KING. Blessed are clouds, to do as such clouds do.
    Vouchsafe, bright moon, and these thy stars, to shine,
    Those clouds removed, upon our watery eyne.
  ROSALINE. O vain petitioner! beg a greater matter;
    Thou now requests but moonshine in the water.
  KING. Then in our measure do but vouchsafe one change.
    Thou bid'st me beg; this begging is not strange.
  ROSALINE. Play, music, then. Nay, you must do it soon.
    Not yet? No dance! Thus change I like the moon.
  KING. Will you not dance? How come you thus estranged?
  ROSALINE. You took the moon at full; but now she's changed.
  KING. Yet still she is the Moon, and I the Man.
    The music plays; vouchsafe some motion to it.
  ROSALINE. Our ears vouchsafe it.
  KING. But your legs should do it.
  ROSALINE. Since you are strangers, and come here by chance,
    We'll not be nice; take hands. We will not dance.
  KING. Why take we hands then?
  ROSALINE. Only to part friends.
    Curtsy, sweet hearts; and so the measure ends.
  KING. More measure of this measure; be not nice.
  ROSALINE. We can afford no more at such a price.
  KING. Price you yourselves. What buys your company?
  ROSALINE. Your absence only.
  KING. That can never be.
  ROSALINE. Then cannot we be bought; and so adieu-
    Twice to your visor and half once to you.
  KING. If you deny to dance, let's hold more chat.
  ROSALINE. In private then.
  KING. I am best pleas'd with that.       [They converse apart]
  BEROWNE. White-handed mistress, one sweet word with thee.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Honey, and milk, and sugar; there is three.
  BEROWNE. Nay, then, two treys, an if you grow so nice,
    Metheglin, wort, and malmsey; well run dice!
    There's half a dozen sweets.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Seventh sweet, adieu!
    Since you can cog, I'll play no more with you.
  BEROWNE. One word in secret.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Let it not be sweet.
  BEROWNE. Thou grievest my gall.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Gall! bitter.
  BEROWNE. Therefore meet.                 [They converse apart]
  DUMAIN. Will you vouchsafe with me to change a word?
  MARIA. Name it.
  DUMAIN. Fair lady-
  MARIA. Say you so? Fair lord-
    Take that for your fair lady.
  DUMAIN. Please it you,
    As much in private, and I'll bid adieu.
                                           [They converse apart]
  KATHARINE. What, was your vizard made without a tongue?
  LONGAVILLE. I know the reason, lady, why you ask.
  KATHARINE. O for your reason! Quickly, sir; I long.
  LONGAVILLE. You have a double tongue within your mask,
    And would afford my speechless vizard half.
  KATHARINE. 'Veal' quoth the Dutchman. Is not 'veal' a calf?
  LONGAVILLE. A calf, fair lady!
  KATHARINE. No, a fair lord calf.
  LONGAVILLE. Let's part the word.
  KATHARINE. No, I'll not be your half.
    Take all and wean it; it may prove an ox.
  LONGAVILLE. Look how you butt yourself in these sharp mocks!
    Will you give horns, chaste lady? Do not so.
  KATHARINE. Then die a calf, before your horns do grow.
  LONGAVILLE. One word in private with you ere I die.
  KATHARINE. Bleat softly, then; the butcher hears you cry.
                                           [They converse apart]
  BOYET. The tongues of mocking wenches are as keen
    As is the razor's edge invisible,
    Cutting a smaller hair than may be seen,
    Above the sense of sense; so sensible
    Seemeth their conference; their conceits have wings,
    Fleeter than arrows, bullets, wind, thought, swifter things.
  ROSALINE. Not one word more, my maids; break off, break off.
  BEROWNE. By heaven, all dry-beaten with pure scoff!
  KING. Farewell, mad wenches; you have simple wits.
                             Exeunt KING, LORDS, and BLACKAMOORS
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Twenty adieus, my frozen Muscovits.
    Are these the breed of wits so wondered at?
  BOYET. Tapers they are, with your sweet breaths puff'd out.
  ROSALINE. Well-liking wits they have; gross, gross; fat, fat.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. O poverty in wit, kingly-poor flout!
    Will they not, think you, hang themselves to-night?
    Or ever but in vizards show their faces?
    This pert Berowne was out of count'nance quite.
  ROSALINE. They were all in lamentable cases!
    The King was weeping-ripe for a good word.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Berowne did swear himself out of all suit.
  MARIA. Dumain was at my service, and his sword.
    'No point' quoth I; my servant straight was mute.
  KATHARINE. Lord Longaville said I came o'er his heart;
    And trow you what he call'd me?
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Qualm, perhaps.
  KATHARINE. Yes, in good faith.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Go, sickness as thou art!
  ROSALINE. Well, better wits have worn plain statute-caps.
    But will you hear? The King is my love sworn.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. And quick Berowne hath plighted faith to me.
  KATHARINE. And Longaville was for my service born.
  MARIA. Dumain is mine, as sure as bark on tree.
  BOYET. Madam, and pretty mistresses, give ear:
    Immediately they will again be here
    In their own shapes; for it can never be
    They will digest this harsh indignity.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Will they return?
  BOYET. They will, they will, God knows,
    And leap for joy, though they are lame with blows;
    Therefore, change favours; and, when they repair,
    Blow like sweet roses in this summer air.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. How blow? how blow? Speak to be understood.
  BOYET. Fair ladies mask'd are roses in their bud:
    Dismask'd, their damask sweet commixture shown,
    Are angels vailing clouds, or roses blown.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Avaunt, perplexity! What shall we do
    If they return in their own shapes to woo?
  ROSALINE. Good madam, if by me you'll be advis'd,
    Let's mock them still, as well known as disguis'd.
    Let us complain to them what fools were here,
    Disguis'd like Muscovites, in shapeless gear;
    And wonder what they were, and to what end
    Their shallow shows and prologue vilely penn'd,
    And their rough carriage so ridiculous,
    Should be presented at our tent to us.
  BOYET. Ladies, withdraw; the gallants are at hand.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Whip to our tents, as roes run o'er land.
                 Exeunt PRINCESS, ROSALINE, KATHARINE, and MARIA

         Re-enter the KING, BEROWNE, LONGAVILLE, and DUMAIN,
                        in their proper habits

  KING. Fair sir, God save you! Where's the Princess?
  BOYET. Gone to her tent. Please it your Majesty
    Command me any service to her thither?
  KING. That she vouchsafe me audience for one word.
  BOYET. I will; and so will she, I know, my lord.          Exit
  BEROWNE. This fellow pecks up wit as pigeons pease,
    And utters it again when God doth please.
    He is wit's pedlar, and retails his wares
    At wakes, and wassails, meetings, markets, fairs;
    And we that sell by gross, the Lord doth know,
    Have not the grace to grace it with such show.
    This gallant pins the wenches on his sleeve;
    Had he been Adam, he had tempted Eve.
    'A can carve too, and lisp; why this is he
    That kiss'd his hand away in courtesy;
    This is the ape of form, Monsieur the Nice,
    That, when he plays at tables, chides the dice
    In honourable terms; nay, he can sing
    A mean most meanly; and in ushering,
    Mend him who can. The ladies call him sweet;
    The stairs, as he treads on them, kiss his feet.
    This is the flow'r that smiles on every one,
    To show his teeth as white as whales-bone;
    And consciences that will not die in debt
    Pay him the due of 'honey-tongued Boyet.'
  KING. A blister on his sweet tongue, with my heart,
    That put Armado's page out of his part!

        Re-enter the PRINCESS, ushered by BOYET; ROSALINE,
                      MARIA, and KATHARINE

  BEROWNE. See where it comes! Behaviour, what wert thou
    Till this man show'd thee? And what art thou now?
  KING. All hail, sweet madam, and fair time of day!
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. 'Fair' in 'all hail' is foul, as I conceive.
  KING. Construe my speeches better, if you may.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Then wish me better; I will give you leave.
  KING. We came to visit you, and purpose now
    To lead you to our court; vouchsafe it then.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. This field shall hold me, and so hold your vow:
    Nor God, nor I, delights in perjur'd men.
  KING. Rebuke me not for that which you provoke.
    The virtue of your eye must break my oath.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. You nickname virtue: vice you should have
      spoke;
    For virtue's office never breaks men's troth.
    Now by my maiden honour, yet as pure
    As the unsullied lily, I protest,
    A world of torments though I should endure,
    I would not yield to be your house's guest;
    So much I hate a breaking cause to be
    Of heavenly oaths, vowed with integrity.
  KING. O, you have liv'd in desolation here,
    Unseen, unvisited, much to our shame.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Not so, my lord; it is not so, I swear;
    We have had pastimes here, and pleasant game;
    A mess of Russians left us but of late.
  KING. How, madam! Russians!
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Ay, in truth, my lord;
    Trim gallants, full of courtship and of state.
  ROSALINE. Madam, speak true. It is not so, my lord.
    My lady, to the manner of the days,
    In courtesy gives undeserving praise.
    We four indeed confronted were with four
    In Russian habit; here they stayed an hour
    And talk'd apace; and in that hour, my lord,
    They did not bless us with one happy word.
    I dare not call them fools; but this I think,
    When they are thirsty, fools would fain have drink.
  BEROWNE. This jest is dry to me. Fair gentle sweet,
    Your wit makes wise things foolish; when we greet,
    With eyes best seeing, heaven's fiery eye,
    By light we lose light; your capacity
    Is of that nature that to your huge store
    Wise things seem foolish and rich things but poor.
  ROSALINE. This proves you wise and rich, for in my eye-
  BEROWNE. I am a fool, and full of poverty.
  ROSALINE. But that you take what doth to you belong,
    It were a fault to snatch words from my tongue.
  BEROWNE. O, I am yours, and all that I possess.
  ROSALINE. All the fool mine?
  BEROWNE. I cannot give you less.
  ROSALINE. Which of the vizards was it that you wore?
  BEROWNE. Where? when? what vizard? Why demand you this?
  ROSALINE. There, then, that vizard; that superfluous case
    That hid the worse and show'd the better face.
  KING. We were descried; they'll mock us now downright.
  DUMAIN. Let us confess, and turn it to a jest.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Amaz'd, my lord? Why looks your Highness sad?
  ROSALINE. Help, hold his brows! he'll swoon! Why look you pale?
    Sea-sick, I think, coming from Muscovy.
  BEROWNE. Thus pour the stars down plagues for perjury.
    Can any face of brass hold longer out?
    Here stand I, lady- dart thy skill at me,
    Bruise me with scorn, confound me with a flout,
    Thrust thy sharp wit quite through my ignorance,
    Cut me to pieces with thy keen conceit;
    And I will wish thee never more to dance,
    Nor never more in Russian habit wait.
    O, never will I trust to speeches penn'd,
    Nor to the motion of a school-boy's tongue,
    Nor never come in vizard to my friend,
    Nor woo in rhyme, like a blind harper's song.
    Taffeta phrases, silken terms precise,
    Three-pil'd hyperboles, spruce affectation,
    Figures pedantical- these summer-flies
    Have blown me full of maggot ostentation.
    I do forswear them; and I here protest,
    By this white glove- how white the hand, God knows!-
    Henceforth my wooing mind shall be express'd
    In russet yeas, and honest kersey noes.
    And, to begin, wench- so God help me, law!-
    My love to thee is sound, sans crack or flaw.
  ROSALINE. Sans 'sans,' I pray you.
  BEROWNE. Yet I have a trick
    Of the old rage; bear with me, I am sick;
    I'll leave it by degrees. Soft, let us see-
    Write 'Lord have mercy on us' on those three;
    They are infected; in their hearts it lies;
    They have the plague, and caught it of your eyes.
    These lords are visited; you are not free,
    For the Lord's tokens on you do I see.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. No, they are free that gave these tokens to us.
  BEROWNE. Our states are forfeit; seek not to undo us.
  ROSALINE. It is not so; for how can this be true,
    That you stand forfeit, being those that sue?
  BEROWNE. Peace; for I will not have to do with you.
  ROSALINE. Nor shall not, if I do as I intend.
  BEROWNE. Speak for yourselves; my wit is at an end.
  KING. Teach us, sweet madam, for our rude transgression
    Some fair excuse.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. The fairest is confession.
    Were not you here but even now, disguis'd?
  KING. Madam, I was.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. And were you well advis'd?
  KING. I was, fair madam.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. When you then were here,
    What did you whisper in your lady's ear?
  KING. That more than all the world I did respect her.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. When she shall challenge this, you will reject
    her.
  KING. Upon mine honour, no.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Peace, peace, forbear;
    Your oath once broke, you force not to forswear.
  KING. Despise me when I break this oath of mine.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. I will; and therefore keep it. Rosaline,
    What did the Russian whisper in your ear?
  ROSALINE. Madam, he swore that he did hold me dear
    As precious eyesight, and did value me
    Above this world; adding thereto, moreover,
    That he would wed me, or else die my lover.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. God give thee joy of him! The noble lord
     Most honourably doth uphold his word.
  KING. What mean you, madam? By my life, my troth,
    I never swore this lady such an oath.
  ROSALINE. By heaven, you did; and, to confirm it plain,
    You gave me this; but take it, sir, again.
  KING. My faith and this the Princess I did give;
    I knew her by this jewel on her sleeve.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Pardon me, sir, this jewel did she wear;
    And Lord Berowne, I thank him, is my dear.
    What, will you have me, or your pearl again?
 BEROWNE. Neither of either; I remit both twain.
    I see the trick on't: here was a consent,
    Knowing aforehand of our merriment,
    To dash it like a Christmas comedy.
    Some carry-tale, some please-man, some slight zany,
    Some mumble-news, some trencher-knight, some Dick,
    That smiles his cheek in years and knows the trick
    To make my lady laugh when she's dispos'd,
    Told our intents before; which once disclos'd,
    The ladies did change favours; and then we,
    Following the signs, woo'd but the sign of she.
    Now, to our perjury to add more terror,
    We are again forsworn in will and error.
    Much upon this it is; [To BOYET] and might not you
    Forestall our sport, to make us thus untrue?
    Do not you know my lady's foot by th' squier,
    And laugh upon the apple of her eye?
    And stand between her back, sir, and the fire,
    Holding a trencher, jesting merrily?
    You put our page out. Go, you are allow'd;
    Die when you will, a smock shall be your shroud.
    You leer upon me, do you? There's an eye
    Wounds like a leaden sword.
  BOYET. Full merrily
    Hath this brave manage, this career, been run.
  BEROWNE. Lo, he is tilting straight! Peace; I have done.

                          Enter COSTARD

    Welcome, pure wit! Thou part'st a fair fray.
  COSTARD. O Lord, sir, they would know
     Whether the three Worthies shall come in or no?
  BEROWNE. What, are there but three?
  COSTARD. No, sir; but it is vara fine,
    For every one pursents three.
  BEROWNE. And three times thrice is nine.
  COSTARD. Not so, sir; under correction, sir,
    I hope it is not so.
    You cannot beg us, sir, I can assure you, sir; we know what we
      know;
    I hope, sir, three times thrice, sir-
  BEROWNE. Is not nine.
  COSTARD. Under correction, sir, we know whereuntil it doth amount.
  BEROWNE. By Jove, I always took three threes for nine.
  COSTARD. O Lord, sir, it were pity you should get your living by
    reck'ning, sir.
  BEROWNE. How much is it?
  COSTARD. O Lord, sir, the parties themselves, the actors, sir, will
    show whereuntil it doth amount. For mine own part, I am, as they
    say, but to parfect one man in one poor man, Pompion the Great,
    sir.
  BEROWNE. Art thou one of the Worthies?
  COSTARD. It pleased them to think me worthy of Pompey the Great;
    for mine own part, I know not the degree of the Worthy; but I am
    to stand for him.
  BEROWNE. Go, bid them prepare.
  COSTARD. We will turn it finely off, sir; we will take some care.
                                                    Exit COSTARD
  KING. Berowne, they will shame us; let them not approach.
  BEROWNE. We are shame-proof, my lord, and 'tis some policy
    To have one show worse than the King's and his company.
  KING. I say they shall not come.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Nay, my good lord, let me o'errule you now.
    That sport best pleases that doth least know how;
    Where zeal strives to content, and the contents
    Dies in the zeal of that which it presents.
    Their form confounded makes most form in mirth,
    When great things labouring perish in their birth.
  BEROWNE. A right description of our sport, my lord.

                        Enter ARMADO

  ARMADO. Anointed, I implore so much expense of thy royal sweet
    breath as will utter a brace of words.
           [Converses apart with the KING, and delivers a paper]
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Doth this man serve God?
  BEROWNE. Why ask you?
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. 'A speaks not like a man of God his making.
  ARMADO. That is all one, my fair, sweet, honey monarch; for, I
    protest, the schoolmaster is exceeding fantastical; too too vain,
    too too vain; but we will put it, as they say, to fortuna de la
    guerra. I wish you the peace of mind, most royal couplement!
                                                     Exit ARMADO
  KING. Here is like to be a good presence of Worthies. He presents
    Hector of Troy; the swain, Pompey the Great; the parish curate,
    Alexander; Arinado's page, Hercules; the pedant, Judas
    Maccabaeus.
    And if these four Worthies in their first show thrive,
    These four will change habits and present the other five.
  BEROWNE. There is five in the first show.
  KING. You are deceived, 'tis not so.
  BEROWNE. The pedant, the braggart, the hedge-priest, the fool, and
    the boy:
    Abate throw at novum, and the whole world again
    Cannot pick out five such, take each one in his vein.
  KING. The ship is under sail, and here she comes amain.

                   Enter COSTARD, armed for POMPEY

  COSTARD. I Pompey am-
  BEROWNE. You lie, you are not he.
  COSTARD. I Pompey am-
  BOYET. With libbard's head on knee.
  BEROWNE. Well said, old mocker; I must needs be friends with thee.
  COSTARD. I Pompey am, Pompey surnam'd the Big-
   DUMAIN. The Great.
  COSTARD. It is Great, sir.
    Pompey surnam'd the Great,
    That oft in field, with targe and shield, did make my foe to
      sweat;
    And travelling along this coast, I bere am come by chance,
    And lay my arms before the legs of this sweet lass of France.

    If your ladyship would say 'Thanks, Pompey,' I had done.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Great thanks, great Pompey.
  COSTARD. 'Tis not so much worth; but I hope I was perfect.
    I made a little fault in Great.
  BEROWNE. My hat to a halfpenny, Pompey proves the best Worthy.

                 Enter SIR NATHANIEL, for ALEXANDER

  NATHANIEL. When in the world I liv'd, I was the world's commander;
    By east, west, north, and south, I spread my conquering might.
    My scutcheon plain declares that I am Alisander-
  BOYET. Your nose says, no, you are not; for it stands to right.
  BEROWNE. Your nose smells 'no' in this, most tender-smelling
    knight.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. The conqueror is dismay'd. Proceed, good
    Alexander.
  NATHANIEL. When in the world I liv'd, I was the world's commander-
  BOYET. Most true, 'tis right, you were so, Alisander.
  BEROWNE. Pompey the Great!
  COSTARD. Your servant, and Costard.
  BEROWNE. Take away the conqueror, take away Alisander.
  COSTARD. [To Sir Nathaniel] O, Sir, you have overthrown Alisander
    the conqueror! You will be scrap'd out of the painted cloth for
    this. Your lion, that holds his poleaxe sitting on a close-stool,
    will be given to Ajax. He will be the ninth Worthy. A conqueror
    and afeard to speak! Run away for shame, Alisander.
    [Sir Nathaniel retires] There, an't shall please you, a foolish
    mild man; an honest man, look you, and soon dash'd. He is a
    marvellous good neighbour, faith, and a very good bowler; but for
    Alisander- alas! you see how 'tis- a little o'erparted. But there
    are Worthies a-coming will speak their mind in some other sort.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Stand aside, good Pompey.

         Enter HOLOFERNES, for JUDAS; and MOTH, for HERCULES

  HOLOFERNES. Great Hercules is presented by this imp,
    Whose club kill'd Cerberus, that three-headed canus;
    And when be was a babe, a child, a shrimp,
    Thus did he strangle serpents in his manus.
    Quoniam he seemeth in minority,
    Ergo I come with this apology.
    Keep some state in thy exit, and vanish.      [MOTH retires]
    Judas I am-
  DUMAIN. A Judas!
  HOLOFERNES. Not Iscariot, sir.
    Judas I am, ycliped Maccabaeus.
  DUMAIN. Judas Maccabaeus clipt is plain Judas.
  BEROWNE. A kissing traitor. How art thou prov'd Judas?
  HOLOFERNES. Judas I am-
  DUMAIN. The more shame for you, Judas!
  HOLOFERNES. What mean you, sir?
  BOYET. To make Judas hang himself.
  HOLOFERNES. Begin, sir; you are my elder.
  BEROWNE. Well followed: Judas was hanged on an elder.
  HOLOFERNES. I will not be put out of countenance.
  BEROWNE. Because thou hast no face.
  HOLOFERNES. What is this?
  BOYET. A cittern-head.
  DUMAIN. The head of a bodkin.
  BEROWNE. A death's face in a ring.
  LONGAVILLE. The face of an old Roman coin, scarce seen.
  BOYET. The pommel of Coesar's falchion.
  DUMAIN. The carv'd-bone face on a flask.
  BEROWNE. Saint George's half-cheek in a brooch.
  DUMAIN. Ay, and in a brooch of lead.
  BEROWNE. Ay, and worn in the cap of a tooth-drawer. And now,
    forward; for we have put thee in countenance.
  HOLOFERNES. You have put me out of countenance.
  BEROWNE. False: we have given thee faces.
  HOLOFERNES. But you have outfac'd them all.
  BEROWNE. An thou wert a lion we would do so.
  BOYET. Therefore, as he is an ass, let him go.
    And so adieu, sweet Jude! Nay, why dost thou stay?
  DUMAIN. For the latter end of his name.
  BEROWNE. For the ass to the Jude; give it him- Jud-as, away.
  HOLOFERNES. This is not generous, not gentle, not humble.
  BOYET. A light for Monsieur Judas! It grows dark, he may stumble.
                                            [HOLOFERNES retires]
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Alas, poor Maccabaeus, how hath he been baited!

                   Enter ARMADO, for HECTOR

  BEROWNE. Hide thy head, Achilles; here comes Hector in arms.
  DUMAIN. Though my mocks come home by me, I will now be merry.
  KING. Hector was but a Troyan in respect of this.
  BOYET. But is this Hector?
  DUMAIN. I think Hector was not so clean-timber'd.
  LONGAVILLE. His leg is too big for Hector's.
  DUMAIN. More calf, certain.
  BOYET. No; he is best indued in the small.
  BEROWNE. This cannot be Hector.
  DUMAIN. He's a god or a painter, for he makes faces.
  ARMADO. The armipotent Mars, of lances the almighty,
    Gave Hector a gift-
  DUMAIN. A gilt nutmeg.
  BEROWNE. A lemon.
  LONGAVILLE. Stuck with cloves.
  DUMAIN. No, cloven.
  ARMADO. Peace!
    The armipotent Mars, of lances the almighty,
    Gave Hector a gift, the heir of Ilion;
    A man so breathed that certain he would fight ye,
    From morn till night out of his pavilion.
    I am that flower-
  DUMAIN. That mint.
  LONGAVILLE. That columbine.
  ARMADO. Sweet Lord Longaville, rein thy tongue.
  LONGAVILLE. I must rather give it the rein, for it runs against
    Hector.
  DUMAIN. Ay, and Hector's a greyhound.
  ARMADO. The sweet war-man is dead and rotten; sweet chucks, beat
    not the bones of the buried; when he breathed, he was a man. But
    I will forward with my device. [To the PRINCESS] Sweet royalty,
    bestow on me the sense of hearing.

          [BEROWNE steps forth, and speaks to COSTARD]

  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Speak, brave Hector; we are much delighted.
  ARMADO. I do adore thy sweet Grace's slipper.
  BOYET. [Aside to DUMAIN] Loves her by the foot.
  DUMAIN. [Aside to BOYET] He may not by the yard.
  ARMADO. This Hector far surmounted Hannibal-
  COSTARD. The party is gone, fellow Hector, she is gone; she is two
    months on her way.
  ARMADO. What meanest thou?
  COSTARD. Faith, unless you play the honest Troyan, the poor wench
    is cast away. She's quick; the child brags in her belly already;
    'tis yours.
  ARMADO. Dost thou infamonize me among potentates? Thou shalt die.
  COSTARD. Then shall Hector be whipt for Jaquenetta that is quick by
    him, and hang'd for Pompey that is dead by him.
  DUMAIN. Most rare Pompey!
  BOYET. Renowned Pompey!
  BEROWNE. Greater than Great! Great, great, great Pompey! Pompey the
    Huge!
  DUMAIN. Hector trembles.
  BEROWNE. Pompey is moved. More Ates, more Ates! Stir them on! stir
    them on!
  DUMAIN. Hector will challenge him.
  BEROWNE. Ay, if 'a have no more man's blood in his belly than will
    sup a flea.
  ARMADO. By the North Pole, I do challenge thee.
  COSTARD. I will not fight with a pole, like a Northern man; I'll
    slash; I'll do it by the sword. I bepray you, let me borrow my
    arms again.
  DUMAIN. Room for the incensed Worthies!
  COSTARD. I'll do it in my shirt.
  DUMAIN. Most resolute Pompey!
  MOTH. Master, let me take you a buttonhole lower. Do you not see
    Pompey is uncasing for the combat? What mean you? You will lose
    your reputation.
  ARMADO. Gentlemen and soldiers, pardon me; I will not combat in my
    shirt.
  DUMAIN. You may not deny it: Pompey hath made the challenge.
  ARMADO. Sweet bloods, I both may and will.
  BEROWNE. What reason have you for 't?
  ARMADO. The naked truth of it is: I have no shirt; I go woolward
    for penance.
  BOYET. True, and it was enjoined him in Rome for want of linen;
    since when, I'll be sworn, he wore none but a dishclout of
    Jaquenetta's, and that 'a wears next his heart for a favour.

                 Enter as messenger, MONSIEUR MARCADE

  MARCADE. God save you, madam!
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Welcome, Marcade;
    But that thou interruptest our merriment.
  MARCADE. I am sorry, madam; for the news I bring
    Is heavy in my tongue. The King your father-
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Dead, for my life!
  MARCADE. Even so; my tale is told.
  BEROWNE. WOrthies away; the scene begins to cloud.
  ARMADO. For mine own part, I breathe free breath. I have seen the
    day of wrong through the little hole of discretion, and I will
    right myself like a soldier.                 Exeunt WORTHIES
  KING. How fares your Majesty?
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Boyet, prepare; I will away to-night.
  KING. Madam, not so; I do beseech you stay.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Prepare, I say. I thank you, gracious lords,
    For all your fair endeavours, and entreat,
    Out of a new-sad soul, that you vouchsafe
    In your rich wisdom to excuse or hide
    The liberal opposition of our spirits,
    If over-boldly we have borne ourselves
    In the converse of breath- your gentleness
    Was guilty of it. Farewell, worthy lord.
    A heavy heart bears not a nimble tongue.
    Excuse me so, coming too short of thanks
    For my great suit so easily obtain'd.
  KING. The extreme parts of time extremely forms
    All causes to the purpose of his speed;
    And often at his very loose decides
    That which long process could not arbitrate.
    And though the mourning brow of progeny
    Forbid the smiling courtesy of love
    The holy suit which fain it would convince,
    Yet, since love's argument was first on foot,
    Let not the cloud of sorrow justle it
    From what it purpos'd; since to wail friends lost
    Is not by much so wholesome-profitable
    As to rejoice at friends but newly found.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. I understand you not; my griefs are double.
  BEROWNE. Honest plain words best pierce the ear of grief;
    And by these badges understand the King.
    For your fair sakes have we neglected time,
    Play'd foul play with our oaths; your beauty, ladies,
    Hath much deformed us, fashioning our humours
    Even to the opposed end of our intents;
    And what in us hath seem'd ridiculous,
    As love is full of unbefitting strains,
    All wanton as a child, skipping and vain;
    Form'd by the eye and therefore, like the eye,
    Full of strange shapes, of habits, and of forms,
    Varying in subjects as the eye doth roll
    To every varied object in his glance;
    Which parti-coated presence of loose love
    Put on by us, if in your heavenly eyes
    Have misbecom'd our oaths and gravities,
    Those heavenly eyes that look into these faults
    Suggested us to make. Therefore, ladies,
    Our love being yours, the error that love makes
    Is likewise yours. We to ourselves prove false,
    By being once false for ever to be true
    To those that make us both- fair ladies, you;
    And even that falsehood, in itself a sin,
    Thus purifies itself and turns to grace.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. We have receiv'd your letters, full of love;
    Your favours, the ambassadors of love;
    And, in our maiden council, rated them
    At courtship, pleasant jest, and courtesy,
    As bombast and as lining to the time;
    But more devout than this in our respects
    Have we not been; and therefore met your loves
    In their own fashion, like a merriment.
  DUMAIN. Our letters, madam, show'd much more than jest.
  LONGAVILLE. So did our looks.
  ROSALINE. We did not quote them so.
  KING. Now, at the latest minute of the hour,
    Grant us your loves.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. A time, methinks, too short
    To make a world-without-end bargain in.
    No, no, my lord, your Grace is perjur'd much,
    Full of dear guiltiness; and therefore this,
    If for my love, as there is no such cause,
    You will do aught- this shall you do for me:
    Your oath I will not trust; but go with speed
    To some forlorn and naked hermitage,
    Remote from all the pleasures of the world;
    There stay until the twelve celestial signs
    Have brought about the annual reckoning.
    If this austere insociable life
    Change not your offer made in heat of blood,
    If frosts and fasts, hard lodging and thin weeds,
    Nip not the gaudy blossoms of your love,
    But that it bear this trial, and last love,
    Then, at the expiration of the year,
    Come, challenge me, challenge me by these deserts;
    And, by this virgin palm now kissing thine,
    I will be thine; and, till that instant, shut
    My woeful self up in a mournful house,
    Raining the tears of lamentation
    For the remembrance of my father's death.
    If this thou do deny, let our hands part,
    Neither intitled in the other's heart.
  KING. If this, or more than this, I would deny,
    To flatter up these powers of mine with rest,
    The sudden hand of death close up mine eye!
    Hence hermit then, my heart is in thy breast.
  BEROWNE. And what to me, my love? and what to me?
  ROSALINE. You must he purged too, your sins are rack'd;
    You are attaint with faults and perjury;
    Therefore, if you my favour mean to get,
    A twelvemonth shall you spend, and never rest,
    But seek the weary beds of people sick.
  DUMAIN. But what to me, my love? but what to me?
    A wife?
  KATHARINE. A beard, fair health, and honesty;
    With threefold love I wish you all these three.
  DUMAIN. O, shall I say I thank you, gentle wife?
  KATHARINE. No so, my lord; a twelvemonth and a day
    I'll mark no words that smooth-fac'd wooers say.
    Come when the King doth to my lady come;
    Then, if I have much love, I'll give you some.
  DUMAIN. I'll serve thee true and faithfully till then.
  KATHARINE. Yet swear not, lest ye be forsworn again.
  LONGAVILLE. What says Maria?
  MARIA. At the twelvemonth's end
    I'll change my black gown for a faithful friend.
  LONGAVILLE. I'll stay with patience; but the time is long.
  MARIA. The liker you; few taller are so young.
  BEROWNE. Studies my lady? Mistress, look on me;
    Behold the window of my heart, mine eye,
    What humble suit attends thy answer there.
    Impose some service on me for thy love.
  ROSALINE. Oft have I heard of you, my Lord Berowne,
    Before I saw you; and the world's large tongue
    Proclaims you for a man replete with mocks,
    Full of comparisons and wounding flouts,
    Which you on all estates will execute
    That lie within the mercy of your wit.
    To weed this wormwood from your fruitful brain,
    And therewithal to win me, if you please,
    Without the which I am not to be won,
    You shall this twelvemonth term from day to day
    Visit the speechless sick, and still converse
    With groaning wretches; and your task shall be,
    With all the fierce endeavour of your wit,
    To enforce the pained impotent to smile.
  BEROWNE. To move wild laughter in the throat of death?
    It cannot be; it is impossible;
    Mirth cannot move a soul in agony.
  ROSALINE. Why, that's the way to choke a gibing spirit,
    Whose influence is begot of that loose grace
    Which shallow laughing hearers give to fools.
    A jest's prosperity lies in the ear
    Of him that hears it, never in the tongue
    Of him that makes it; then, if sickly ears,
    Deaf'd with the clamours of their own dear groans,
    Will hear your idle scorns, continue then,
    And I will have you and that fault withal.
    But if they will not, throw away that spirit,
    And I shall find you empty of that fault,
    Right joyful of your reformation.
  BEROWNE. A twelvemonth? Well, befall what will befall,
    I'll jest a twelvemonth in an hospital.
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. [ To the King] Ay, sweet my lord, and so I take
    my leave.
  KING. No, madam; we will bring you on your way.
  BEROWNE. Our wooing doth not end like an old play:
    Jack hath not Jill. These ladies' courtesy
    Might well have made our sport a comedy.
  KING. Come, sir, it wants a twelvemonth an' a day,
    And then 'twill end.
  BEROWNE. That's too long for a play.

                          Re-enter ARMADO

  ARMADO. Sweet Majesty, vouchsafe me-
  PRINCESS OF FRANCE. Was not that not Hector?
  DUMAIN. The worthy knight of Troy.
  ARMADO. I will kiss thy royal finger, and take leave. I am a
    votary: I have vow'd to Jaquenetta to hold the plough for her
    sweet love three year. But, most esteemed greatness, will you
    hear the dialogue that the two learned men have compiled in
    praise of the Owl and the Cuckoo? It should have followed in the
    end of our show.
  KING. Call them forth quickly; we will do so.
  ARMADO. Holla! approach.

                            Enter All

    This side is Hiems, Winter; this Ver, the Spring- the one
    maintained by the Owl, th' other by the Cuckoo. Ver, begin.

                      SPRING
         When daisies pied and violets blue
         And lady-smocks all silver-white
         And cuckoo-buds of yellow hue
         Do paint the meadows with delight,
         The cuckoo then on every tree
         Mocks married men, for thus sings he:
              'Cuckoo;
         Cuckoo, cuckoo'- O word of fear,
         Unpleasing to a married ear!

         When shepherds pipe on oaten straws,
         And merry larks are ploughmen's clocks;
         When turtles tread, and rooks and daws,
         And maidens bleach their summer smocks;
         The cuckoo then on every tree
         Mocks married men, for thus sings he:
              'Cuckoo;
         Cuckoo, cuckoo'- O word of fear,
         Unpleasing to a married ear!


                    WINTER

         When icicles hang by the wall,
         And Dick the shepherd blows his nail,
         And Tom bears logs into the hall,
         And milk comes frozen home in pail,
         When blood is nipp'd, and ways be foul,
         Then nightly sings the staring owl:
              'Tu-who;
         Tu-whit, Tu-who'- A merry note,
         While greasy Joan doth keel the pot.

         When all aloud the wind doth blow,
         And coughing drowns the parson's saw,
         And birds sit brooding in the snow,
         And Marian's nose looks red and raw,
         When roasted crabs hiss in the bowl,
         Then nightly sings the staring owl:
              'Tu-who;
         Tu-whit, To-who'- A merry note,
         While greasy Joan doth keel the pot.

  ARMADO. The words of Mercury are harsh after the songs of Apollo.
    You that way: we this way.                            Exeunt

THE END



<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>






1606

THE TRAGEDY OF MACBETH


by William Shakespeare



Dramatis Personae

  DUNCAN, King of Scotland
  MACBETH, Thane of Glamis and Cawdor, a general in the King's army
  LADY MACBETH, his wife
  MACDUFF, Thane of Fife, a nobleman of Scotland
  LADY MACDUFF, his wife
  MALCOLM, elder son of Duncan
  DONALBAIN, younger son of Duncan
  BANQUO, Thane of Lochaber, a general in the King's army
  FLEANCE, his son
  LENNOX, nobleman of Scotland
  ROSS, nobleman of Scotland
  MENTEITH nobleman of Scotland
  ANGUS, nobleman of Scotland
  CAITHNESS, nobleman of Scotland
  SIWARD, Earl of Northumberland, general of the English forces
  YOUNG SIWARD, his son
  SEYTON, attendant to Macbeth
  HECATE, Queen of the Witches
  The Three Witches
  Boy, Son of Macduff
  Gentlewoman attending on Lady Macbeth
  An English Doctor
  A Scottish Doctor
  A Sergeant
  A Porter
  An Old Man
  The Ghost of Banquo and other Apparitions
  Lords, Gentlemen, Officers, Soldiers, Murtherers, Attendants,
     and Messengers




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



SCENE: Scotland and England


ACT I. SCENE I.
A desert place. Thunder and lightning.

Enter three Witches.

  FIRST WITCH. When shall we three meet again?
    In thunder, lightning, or in rain?
  SECOND WITCH. When the hurlyburly's done,
    When the battle's lost and won.
  THIRD WITCH. That will be ere the set of sun.
  FIRST WITCH. Where the place?
  SECOND WITCH. Upon the heath.
  THIRD WITCH. There to meet with Macbeth.
  FIRST WITCH. I come, Graymalkin.
  ALL. Paddock calls. Anon!
    Fair is foul, and foul is fair.
    Hover through the fog and filthy air.                Exeunt.




SCENE II.
A camp near Forres. Alarum within.

Enter Duncan, Malcolm, Donalbain, Lennox, with Attendants,
meeting a bleeding Sergeant.

  DUNCAN. What bloody man is that? He can report,
    As seemeth by his plight, of the revolt
    The newest state.
  MALCOLM. This is the sergeant
    Who like a good and hardy soldier fought
    'Gainst my captivity. Hail, brave friend!
    Say to the King the knowledge of the broil
    As thou didst leave it.
  SERGEANT. Doubtful it stood,
    As two spent swimmers that do cling together
    And choke their art. The merciless Macdonwald-
    Worthy to be a rebel, for to that
    The multiplying villainies of nature
    Do swarm upon him -from the Western Isles
    Of kerns and gallowglasses is supplied;
    And Fortune, on his damned quarrel smiling,
    Show'd like a rebel's whore. But all's too weak;
    For brave Macbeth -well he deserves that name-
    Disdaining Fortune, with his brandish'd steel,
    Which smoked with bloody execution,
    Like Valor's minion carved out his passage
    Till he faced the slave,
    Which ne'er shook hands, nor bade farewell to him,
    Till he unseam'd him from the nave to the chaps,
    And fix'd his head upon our battlements.
  DUNCAN. O valiant cousin! Worthy gentleman!
  SERGEANT. As whence the sun 'gins his reflection
    Shipwrecking storms and direful thunders break,
    So from that spring whence comfort seem'd to come
    Discomfort swells. Mark, King of Scotland, mark.
    No sooner justice had, with valor arm'd,
    Compell'd these skipping kerns to trust their heels,
    But the Norweyan lord, surveying vantage,
    With furbish'd arms and new supplies of men,
    Began a fresh assault.
  DUNCAN. Dismay'd not this
    Our captains, Macbeth and Banquo.?
  SERGEANT. Yes,
    As sparrows eagles, or the hare the lion.
    If I say sooth, I must report they were
    As cannons overcharged with double cracks,
    So they
    Doubly redoubled strokes upon the foe.
    Except they meant to bathe in reeking wounds,
    Or memorize another Golgotha,
    I cannot tell-
    But I am faint; my gashes cry for help.
  DUNCAN. So well thy words become thee as thy wounds;
    They smack of honor both. Go get him surgeons.
                                        Exit Sergeant, attended.
    Who comes here?

                       Enter Ross.

  MALCOLM The worthy Thane of Ross.
  LENNOX. What a haste looks through his eyes! So should he look
    That seems to speak things strange.
  ROSS. God save the King!
  DUNCAN. Whence camest thou, worthy Thane?
  ROSS. From Fife, great King,
    Where the Norweyan banners flout the sky
    And fan our people cold.
    Norway himself, with terrible numbers,
    Assisted by that most disloyal traitor
    The Thane of Cawdor, began a dismal conflict,
    Till that Bellona's bridegroom, lapp'd in proof,
    Confronted him with self-comparisons,
    Point against point rebellious, arm 'gainst arm,
    Curbing his lavish spirit; and, to conclude,
    The victory fell on us.
  DUNCAN. Great happiness!
  ROSS. That now
    Sweno, the Norways' king, craves composition;
    Nor would we deign him burial of his men
    Till he disbursed, at Saint Colme's Inch,
    Ten thousand dollars to our general use.
  DUNCAN. No more that Thane of Cawdor shall deceive
    Our bosom interest. Go pronounce his present death,
    And with his former title greet Macbeth.
  ROSS. I'll see it done.
  DUNCAN. What he hath lost, noble Macbeth hath won.
                                                         Exeunt.




SCENE III.
A heath. Thunder.

Enter the three Witches.

  FIRST WITCH. Where hast thou been, sister?
  SECOND WITCH. Killing swine.
  THIRD WITCH. Sister, where thou?
  FIRST WITCH. A sailor's wife had chestnuts in her lap,
    And mounch'd, and mounch'd, and mounch'd. "Give me," quoth I.
    "Aroint thee, witch!" the rump-fed ronyon cries.
    Her husband's to Aleppo gone, master the Tiger;
    But in a sieve I'll thither sail,
    And, like a rat without a tail,
    I'll do, I'll do, and I'll do.
  SECOND WITCH. I'll give thee a wind.
  FIRST WITCH. Thou'rt kind.
  THIRD WITCH. And I another.
  FIRST WITCH. I myself have all the other,
    And the very ports they blow,
    All the quarters that they know
    I' the shipman's card.
    I will drain him dry as hay:
    Sleep shall neither night nor day
    Hang upon his penthouse lid;
    He shall live a man forbid.
    Weary se'nnights nine times nine
    Shall he dwindle, peak, and pine;
    Though his bark cannot be lost,
    Yet it shall be tempest-toss'd.
    Look what I have.
  SECOND WITCH. Show me, show me.
  FIRST WITCH. Here I have a pilot's thumb,
    Wreck'd as homeward he did come.                Drum within.
  THIRD WITCH. A drum, a drum!
    Macbeth doth come.
  ALL. The weird sisters, hand in hand,
    Posters of the sea and land,
    Thus do go about, about,
    Thrice to thine, and thrice to mine,
    And thrice again, to make up nine.
    Peace! The charm's wound up.

                 Enter Macbeth and Banquo.

  MACBETH. So foul and fair a day I have not seen.
  BANQUO. How far is't call'd to Forres? What are these
    So wither'd and so wild in their attire,
    That look not like the inhabitants o' the earth,
    And yet are on't? Live you? or are you aught
    That man may question? You seem to understand me,
    By each at once her choppy finger laying
    Upon her skinny lips. You should be women,
    And yet your beards forbid me to interpret
    That you are so.
  MACBETH. Speak, if you can. What are you?
  FIRST WITCH. All hail, Macbeth, hail to thee, Thane of Glamis!
  SECOND WITCH. All hail, Macbeth, hail to thee, Thane of Cawdor!
  THIRD WITCH. All hail, Macbeth, that shalt be King hereafter!
  BANQUO. Good sir, why do you start, and seem to fear
    Things that do sound so fair? I' the name of truth,
    Are ye fantastical or that indeed
    Which outwardly ye show? My noble partner
    You greet with present grace and great prediction
    Of noble having and of royal hope,
    That he seems rapt withal. To me you speak not.
    If you can look into the seeds of time,
    And say which grain will grow and which will not,
    Speak then to me, who neither beg nor fear
    Your favors nor your hate.
  FIRST WITCH. Hail!
  SECOND WITCH. Hail!
  THIRD WITCH. Hail!
  FIRST WITCH. Lesser than Macbeth, and greater.
  SECOND WITCH. Not so happy, yet much happier.
  THIRD WITCH. Thou shalt get kings, though thou be none.
    So all hail, Macbeth and Banquo!
  FIRST WITCH. Banquo and Macbeth, all hail!
  MACBETH. Stay, you imperfect speakers, tell me more.
    By Sinel's death I know I am Thane of Glamis;
    But how of Cawdor? The Thane of Cawdor lives,
    A prosperous gentleman; and to be King
    Stands not within the prospect of belief,
    No more than to be Cawdor. Say from whence
    You owe this strange intelligence, or why
    Upon this blasted heath you stop our way
    With such prophetic greeting? Speak, I charge you.
                                                 Witches vanish.
  BANQUO. The earth hath bubbles as the water has,
    And these are of them. Whither are they vanish'd?
  MACBETH. Into the air, and what seem'd corporal melted
    As breath into the wind. Would they had stay'd!
  BANQUO. Were such things here as we do speak about?
    Or have we eaten on the insane root
    That takes the reason prisoner?
  MACBETH. Your children shall be kings.
  BANQUO. You shall be King.
  MACBETH. And Thane of Cawdor too. Went it not so?
  BANQUO. To the selfsame tune and words. Who's here?

                Enter Ross and Angus.

  ROSS. The King hath happily received, Macbeth,
    The news of thy success; and when he reads
    Thy personal venture in the rebels' fight,
    His wonders and his praises do contend
    Which should be thine or his. Silenced with that,
    In viewing o'er the rest o' the selfsame day,
    He finds thee in the stout Norweyan ranks,
    Nothing afeard of what thyself didst make,
    Strange images of death. As thick as hail
    Came post with post, and every one did bear
    Thy praises in his kingdom's great defense,
    And pour'd them down before him.
  ANGUS. We are sent
    To give thee, from our royal master, thanks;
    Only to herald thee into his sight,
    Not pay thee.
  ROSS. And for an earnest of a greater honor,
    He bade me, from him, call thee Thane of Cawdor.
    In which addition, hail, most worthy Thane,
    For it is thine.
  BANQUO. What, can the devil speak true?
  MACBETH. The Thane of Cawdor lives. Why do you dress me
    In borrow'd robes?
  ANGUS. Who was the Thane lives yet,
    But under heavy judgement bears that life
    Which he deserves to lose. Whether he was combined
    With those of Norway, or did line the rebel
    With hidden help and vantage, or that with both
    He labor'd in his country's wreck, I know not;
    But treasons capital, confess'd and proved,
    Have overthrown him.
  MACBETH. [Aside.] Glamis, and Thane of Cawdor!
    The greatest is behind. [To Ross and Angus] Thanks for your
      pains.
    [Aside to Banquo] Do you not hope your children shall be kings,
    When those that gave the Thane of Cawdor to me
    Promised no less to them?
  BANQUO. [Aside to Macbeth.] That, trusted home,
    Might yet enkindle you unto the crown,
    Besides the Thane of Cawdor. But 'tis strange;
    And oftentimes, to win us to our harm,
    The instruments of darkness tell us truths,
    Win us with honest trifles, to betray's
    In deepest consequence-
    Cousins, a word, I pray you.
  MACBETH. [Aside.] Two truths are told,
    As happy prologues to the swelling act
    Of the imperial theme-I thank you, gentlemen.
    [Aside.] This supernatural soliciting
    Cannot be ill, cannot be good. If ill,
    Why hath it given me earnest of success,
    Commencing in a truth? I am Thane of Cawdor.
    If good, why do I yield to that suggestion
    Whose horrid image doth unfix my hair
    And make my seated heart knock at my ribs,
    Against the use of nature? Present fears
    Are less than horrible imaginings:
    My thought, whose murther yet is but fantastical,
    Shakes so my single state of man that function
    Is smother'd in surmise, and nothing is
    But what is not.
  BANQUO. Look, how our partner's rapt.
  MACBETH. [Aside.] If chance will have me King, why, chance may
      crown me
    Without my stir.
  BANQUO. New honors come upon him,
    Like our strange garments, cleave not to their mould
    But with the aid of use.
  MACBETH. [Aside.] Come what come may,
    Time and the hour runs through the roughest day.
  BANQUO. Worthy Macbeth, we stay upon your leisure.
  MACBETH. Give me your favor; my dull brain was wrought
    With things forgotten. Kind gentlemen, your pains
    Are register'd where every day I turn
    The leaf to read them. Let us toward the King.
    Think upon what hath chanced, and at more time,
    The interim having weigh'd it, let us speak
    Our free hearts each to other.
  BANQUO. Very gladly.
  MACBETH. Till then, enough. Come, friends.             Exeunt.




SCENE IV.
Forres. The palace.

Flourish. Enter Duncan, Malcolm, Donalbain, Lennox, and Attendants.

  DUNCAN. Is execution done on Cawdor? Are not
    Those in commission yet return'd?
  MALCOLM. My liege,
    They are not yet come back. But I have spoke
    With one that saw him die, who did report
    That very frankly he confess'd his treasons,
    Implored your Highness' pardon, and set forth
    A deep repentance. Nothing in his life
    Became him like the leaving it; he died
    As one that had been studied in his death,
    To throw away the dearest thing he owed
    As 'twere a careless trifle.
  DUNCAN. There's no art
    To find the mind's construction in the face:
    He was a gentleman on whom I built
    An absolute trust.

             Enter Macbeth, Banquo, Ross, and Angus.

    O worthiest cousin!
    The sin of my ingratitude even now
    Was heavy on me. Thou art so far before,
    That swiftest wing of recompense is slow
    To overtake thee. Would thou hadst less deserved,
    That the proportion both of thanks and payment
    Might have been mine! Only I have left to say,
    More is thy due than more than all can pay.
  MACBETH. The service and the loyalty lowe,
    In doing it, pays itself. Your Highness' part
    Is to receive our duties, and our duties
    Are to your throne and state, children and servants,
    Which do but what they should, by doing everything
    Safe toward your love and honor.
  DUNCAN. Welcome hither.
    I have begun to plant thee, and will labor
    To make thee full of growing. Noble Banquo,
    That hast no less deserved, nor must be known
    No less to have done so; let me infold thee
    And hold thee to my heart.
  BANQUO. There if I grow,
    The harvest is your own.
  DUNCAN. My plenteous joys,
    Wanton in fullness, seek to hide themselves
    In drops of sorrow. Sons, kinsmen, thanes,
    And you whose places are the nearest, know
    We will establish our estate upon
    Our eldest, Malcolm, whom we name hereafter
    The Prince of Cumberland; which honor must
    Not unaccompanied invest him only,
    But signs of nobleness, like stars, shall shine
    On all deservers. From hence to Inverness,
    And bind us further to you.
  MACBETH. The rest is labor, which is not used for you.
    I'll be myself the harbinger, and make joyful
    The hearing of my wife with your approach;
    So humbly take my leave.
  DUNCAN. My worthy Cawdor!
  MACBETH. [Aside.] The Prince of Cumberland! That is a step
    On which I must fall down, or else o'erleap,
    For in my way it lies. Stars, hide your fires;
    Let not light see my black and deep desires.
    The eye wink at the hand; yet let that be
    Which the eye fears, when it is done, to see.          Exit.
  DUNCAN. True, worthy Banquo! He is full so valiant,
    And in his commendations I am fed;
    It is a banquet to me. Let's after him,
    Whose care is gone before to bid us welcome.
    It is a peerless kinsman.                  Flourish. Exeunt.




SCENE V.
Inverness. Macbeth's castle.

Enter Lady Macbeth, reading a letter.

  LADY MACBETH. "They met me in the day of success, and I have
    learned by the perfectest report they have more in them than
    mortal knowledge. When I burned in desire to question them
    further, they made themselves air, into which they vanished.
    Whiles I stood rapt in the wonder of it, came missives from the
    King, who all-hailed me 'Thane of Cawdor'; by which title,
    before, these weird sisters saluted me and referred me to the
    coming on of time with 'Hail, King that shalt be!' This have I
    thought good to deliver thee, my dearest partner of greatness,
    that thou mightst not lose the dues of rejoicing, by being
    ignorant of what greatness is promised thee. Lay it to thy heart,
    and farewell."

    Glamis thou art, and Cawdor, and shalt be
    What thou art promised. Yet do I fear thy nature.
    It is too full o' the milk of human kindness
    To catch the nearest way. Thou wouldst be great;
    Art not without ambition, but without
    The illness should attend it. What thou wouldst highly,
    That wouldst thou holily; wouldst not play false,
    And yet wouldst wrongly win. Thou'ldst have, great Glamis,
    That which cries, "Thus thou must do, if thou have it;
    And that which rather thou dost fear to do
    Than wishest should be undone." Hie thee hither,
    That I may pour my spirits in thine ear,
    And chastise with the valor of my tongue
    All that impedes thee from the golden round,
    Which fate and metaphysical aid doth seem
    To have thee crown'd withal.

                     Enter a Messenger.

    What is your tidings?
  MESSENGER. The King comes here tonight.
  LADY MACBETH. Thou'rt mad to say it!
    Is not thy master with him? who, were't so,
    Would have inform'd for preparation.
  MESSENGER. So please you, it is true; our Thane is coming.
    One of my fellows had the speed of him,
    Who, almost dead for breath, had scarcely more
    Than would make up his message.
  LADY MACBETH. Give him tending;
    He brings great news.                        Exit Messenger.
    The raven himself is hoarse
    That croaks the fatal entrance of Duncan
    Under my battlements. Come, you spirits
    That tend on mortal thoughts, unsex me here
    And fill me from the crown to the toe top-full
    Of direst cruelty! Make thick my blood,
    Stop up the access and passage to remorse,
    That no compunctious visitings of nature
    Shake my fell purpose nor keep peace between
    The effect and it! Come to my woman's breasts,
    And take my milk for gall, your murthering ministers,
    Wherever in your sightless substances
    You wait on nature's mischief! Come, thick night,
    And pall thee in the dunnest smoke of hell
    That my keen knife see not the wound it makes
    Nor heaven peep through the blanket of the dark
    To cry, "Hold, hold!"

                    Enter Macbeth.

    Great Glamis! Worthy Cawdor!
    Greater than both, by the all-hail hereafter!
    Thy letters have transported me beyond
    This ignorant present, and I feel now
    The future in the instant.
  MACBETH. My dearest love,
    Duncan comes here tonight.
  LADY MACBETH. And when goes hence?
  MACBETH. Tomorrow, as he purposes.
  LADY MACBETH. O, never
    Shall sun that morrow see!
    Your face, my Thane, is as a book where men
    May read strange matters. To beguile the time,
    Look like the time; bear welcome in your eye,
    Your hand, your tongue; look like the innocent flower,
    But be the serpent under it. He that's coming
    Must be provided for; and you shall put
    This night's great business into my dispatch,
    Which shall to all our nights and days to come
    Give solely sovereign sway and masterdom.
  MACBETH. We will speak further.
  LADY MACBETH. Only look up clear;
    To alter favor ever is to fear.
    Leave all the rest to me.                            Exeunt.




SCENE VI.
Before Macbeth's castle.  Hautboys and torches.

Enter Duncan, Malcolm, Donalbain, Banquo, Lennox, Macduff, Ross, Angus,
and Attendants.

  DUNCAN. This castle hath a pleasant seat; the air
    Nimbly and sweetly recommends itself
    Unto our gentle senses.
  BANQUO. This guest of summer,
    The temple-haunting martlet, does approve
    By his loved mansionry that the heaven's breath
    Smells wooingly here. No jutty, frieze,
    Buttress, nor coign of vantage, but this bird
    Hath made his pendant bed and procreant cradle;
    Where they most breed and haunt, I have observed
    The air is delicate.

                     Enter Lady Macbeth.

  DUNCAN. See, see, our honor'd hostess!
    The love that follows us sometime is our trouble,
    Which still we thank as love. Herein I teach you
    How you shall bid God 'ield us for your pains,
    And thank us for your trouble.
  LADY MACBETH. All our service
    In every point twice done, and then done double,
    Were poor and single business to contend
    Against those honors deep and broad wherewith
    Your Majesty loads our house. For those of old,
    And the late dignities heap'd up to them,
    We rest your hermits.
  DUNCAN. Where's the Thane of Cawdor?
    We coursed him at the heels and had a purpose
    To be his purveyor; but he rides well,
    And his great love, sharp as his spur, hath holp him
    To his home before us. Fair and noble hostess,
    We are your guest tonight.
  LADY MACBETH. Your servants ever
    Have theirs, themselves, and what is theirs, in compt,
    To make their audit at your Highness' pleasure,
    Still to return your own.
  DUNCAN. Give me your hand;
    Conduct me to mine host. We love him highly,
    And shall continue our graces towards him.
    By your leave, hostess.                              Exeunt.




SCENE VII
Macbeth's castle.  Hautboys and torches.

Enter a Sewer and divers Servants with dishes and service, who pass over
the stage.  Then enter Macbeth.

  MACBETH. If it were done when 'tis done, then 'twere well
    It were done quickly. If the assassination
    Could trammel up the consequence, and catch,
    With his surcease, success; that but this blow
    Might be the be-all and the end-all -here,
    But here, upon this bank and shoal of time,
    We'ld jump the life to come. But in these cases
    We still have judgement here, that we but teach
    Bloody instructions, which being taught return
    To plague the inventor. This even-handed justice
    Commends the ingredients of our poison'd chalice
    To our own lips. He's here in double trust:
    First, as I am his kinsman and his subject,
    Strong both against the deed; then, as his host,
    Who should against his murtherer shut the door,
    Not bear the knife myself. Besides, this Duncan
    Hath borne his faculties so meek, hath been
    So clear in his great office, that his virtues
    Will plead like angels trumpet-tongued against
    The deep damnation of his taking-off,
    And pity, like a naked new-born babe
    Striding the blast, or heaven's cherubin horsed
    Upon the sightless couriers of the air,
    Shall blow the horrid deed in every eye,
    That tears shall drown the wind. I have no spur
    To prick the sides of my intent, but only
    Vaulting ambition, which o'erleaps itself
    And falls on the other.

                 Enter Lady Macbeth.

    How now, what news?
  LADY MACBETH. He has almost supp'd. Why have you left the chamber?
  MACBETH. Hath he ask'd for me?
  LADY MACBETH. Know you not he has?
  MACBETH. We will proceed no further in this business:
    He hath honor'd me of late, and I have bought
    Golden opinions from all sorts of people,
    Which would be worn now in their newest gloss,
    Not cast aside so soon.
  LADY MACBETH. Was the hope drunk
    Wherein you dress'd yourself? Hath it slept since?
    And wakes it now, to look so green and pale
    At what it did so freely? From this time
    Such I account thy love. Art thou afeard
    To be the same in thine own act and valor
    As thou art in desire? Wouldst thou have that
    Which thou esteem'st the ornament of life
    And live a coward in thine own esteem,
    Letting "I dare not" wait upon "I would"
    Like the poor cat i' the adage?
  MACBETH. Prithee, peace!
    I dare do all that may become a man;
    Who dares do more is none.
  LADY MACBETH. What beast wast then
    That made you break this enterprise to me?
    When you durst do it, then you were a man,
    And, to be more than what you were, you would
    Be so much more the man. Nor time nor place
    Did then adhere, and yet you would make both.
    They have made themselves, and that their fitness now
    Does unmake you. I have given suck and know
    How tender 'tis to love the babe that milks me-
    I would, while it was smiling in my face,
    Have pluck'd my nipple from his boneless gums
    And dash'd the brains out had I so sworn as you
    Have done to this.
  MACBETH. If we should fail?
  LADY MACBETH. We fail?
    But screw your courage to the sticking-place
    And we'll not fail. When Duncan is asleep-
    Whereto the rather shall his day's hard journey
    Soundly invite him- his two chamberlains
    Will I with wine and wassail so convince
    That memory, the warder of the brain,
    Shall be a fume and the receipt of reason
    A limbeck only. When in swinish sleep
    Their drenched natures lie as in a death,
    What cannot you and I perform upon
    The unguarded Duncan? What not put upon
    His spongy officers, who shall bear the guilt
    Of our great quell?
  MACBETH. Bring forth men-children only,
    For thy undaunted mettle should compose
    Nothing but males. Will it not be received,
    When we have mark'd with blood those sleepy two
    Of his own chamber and used their very daggers,
    That they have done't?
  LADY MACBETH. Who dares receive it other,
    As we shall make our griefs and clamor roar
    Upon his death?
  MACBETH. I am settled and bend up
    Each corporal agent to this terrible feat.
    Away, and mock the time with fairest show:
    False face must hide what the false heart doth know.
                                                         Exeunt.




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT II. SCENE I.
Inverness. Court of Macbeth's castle.

Enter Banquo and Fleance, bearing a torch before him.

  BANQUO. How goes the night, boy?
  FLEANCE. The moon is down; I have not heard the clock.
  BANQUO. And she goes down at twelve.
  FLEANCE. I take't 'tis later, sir.
  BANQUO. Hold, take my sword. There's husbandry in heaven,
    Their candles are all out. Take thee that too.
    A heavy summons lies like lead upon me,
    And yet I would not sleep. Merciful powers,
    Restrain in me the cursed thoughts that nature
    Gives way to in repose!

           Enter Macbeth and a Servant with a torch.

    Give me my sword.
    Who's there?
  MACBETH. A friend.
  BANQUO. What, sir, not yet at rest? The King's abed.
    He hath been in unusual pleasure and
    Sent forth great largess to your offices.
    This diamond he greets your wife withal,
    By the name of most kind hostess, and shut up
    In measureless content.
  MACBETH. Being unprepared,
    Our will became the servant to defect,
    Which else should free have wrought.
  BANQUO. All's well.
    I dreamt last night of the three weird sisters:
    To you they have show'd some truth.
  MACBETH. I think not of them;
    Yet, when we can entreat an hour to serve,
    We would spend it in some words upon that business,
    If you would grant the time.
  BANQUO. At your kind'st leisure.
  MACBETH. If you shall cleave to my consent, when 'tis,
    It shall make honor for you.
  BANQUO. So I lose none
    In seeking to augment it, but still keep
    My bosom franchised and allegiance clear,
    I shall be counsel'd.
  MACBETH. Good repose the while.
  BANQUO. Thanks, sir, the like to you.
                                     Exeunt Banquo. and Fleance.
  MACBETH. Go bid thy mistress, when my drink is ready,
    She strike upon the bell. Get thee to bed.     Exit Servant.
    Is this a dagger which I see before me,
    The handle toward my hand? Come, let me clutch thee.
    I have thee not, and yet I see thee still.
    Art thou not, fatal vision, sensible
    To feeling as to sight? Or art thou but
    A dagger of the mind, a false creation,
    Proceeding from the heat-oppressed brain?
    I see thee yet, in form as palpable
    As this which now I draw.
    Thou marshal'st me the way that I was going,
    And such an instrument I was to use.
    Mine eyes are made the fools o' the other senses,
    Or else worth all the rest. I see thee still,
    And on thy blade and dudgeon gouts of blood,
    Which was not so before. There's no such thing:
    It is the bloody business which informs
    Thus to mine eyes. Now o'er the one half-world
    Nature seems dead, and wicked dreams abuse
    The curtain'd sleep; witchcraft celebrates
    Pale Hecate's offerings; and wither'd Murther,
    Alarum'd by his sentinel, the wolf,
    Whose howl's his watch, thus with his stealthy pace,
    With Tarquin's ravishing strides, towards his design
    Moves like a ghost. Thou sure and firm-set earth,
    Hear not my steps, which way they walk, for fear
    Thy very stones prate of my whereabout,
    And take the present horror from the time,
    Which now suits with it. Whiles I threat, he lives;
    Words to the heat of deeds too cold breath gives.
                                                   A bell rings.
    I go, and it is done; the bell invites me.
    Hear it not, Duncan, for it is a knell
    That summons thee to heaven, or to hell.               Exit.




SCENE II.
The same.

Enter Lady Macbeth.

  LADY MACBETH. That which hath made them drunk hath made me bold;
    What hath quench'd them hath given me fire. Hark! Peace!
    It was the owl that shriek'd, the fatal bellman,
    Which gives the stern'st good night. He is about it:
    The doors are open, and the surfeited grooms
    Do mock their charge with snores. I have drugg'd their possets
    That death and nature do contend about them,
    Whether they live or die.
  MACBETH. [Within.] Who's there' what, ho!
  LADY MACBETH. Alack, I am afraid they have awaked
    And 'tis not done. The attempt and not the deed
    Confounds us. Hark! I laid their daggers ready;
    He could not miss 'em. Had he not resembled
    My father as he slept, I had done't.

                      Enter Macbeth,

    My husband!
  MACBETH. I have done the deed. Didst thou not hear a noise?
  LADY MACBETH. I heard the owl scream and the crickets cry.
    Did not you speak?
  MACBETH. When?
  LADY MACBETH. Now.
  MACBETH. As I descended?
  LADY MACBETH. Ay.
  MACBETH. Hark!
    Who lies i' the second chamber?
  LADY MACBETH. Donalbain.
  MACBETH. This is a sorry sight.           [Looks on his hands.
  LADY MACBETH. A foolish thought, to say a sorry sight.
  MACBETH. There's one did laugh in 's sleep, and one cried,
      "Murther!"
    That they did wake each other. I stood and heard them,
    But they did say their prayers and address'd them
    Again to sleep.
  LADY MACBETH. There are two lodged together.
  MACBETH. One cried, "God bless us!" and "Amen" the other,
    As they had seen me with these hangman's hands.
    Listening their fear, I could not say "Amen,"
    When they did say, "God bless us!"
  LADY MACBETH. Consider it not so deeply.
  MACBETH. But wherefore could not I pronounce "Amen"?
    I had most need of blessing, and "Amen"
    Stuck in my throat.
  LADY MACBETH. These deeds must not be thought
    After these ways; so, it will make us mad.
  MACBETH. I heard a voice cry, "Sleep no more!
    Macbeth does murther sleep" -the innocent sleep,
    Sleep that knits up the ravel'd sleave of care,
    The death of each day's life, sore labor's bath,
    Balm of hurt minds, great nature's second course,
    Chief nourisher in life's feast-
  LADY MACBETH. What do you mean?
  MACBETH. Still it cried, "Sleep no more!" to all the house;
    "Glamis hath murther'd sleep, and therefore Cawdor
    Shall sleep no more. Macbeth shall sleep no more."
  LADY MACBETH. Who was it that thus cried? Why, worthy Thane,
    You do unbend your noble strength, to think
    So brainsickly of things. Go, get some water
    And wash this filthy witness from your hand.
    Why did you bring these daggers from the place?
    They must lie there. Go carry them, and smear
    The sleepy grooms with blood.
  MACBETH. I'll go no more.
    I am afraid to think what I have done;
    Look on't again I dare not.
  LADY MACBETH. Infirm of purpose!
    Give me the daggers. The sleeping and the dead
    Are but as pictures; 'tis the eye of childhood
    That fears a painted devil. If he do bleed,
    I'll gild the faces of the grooms withal,
    For it must seem their guilt.         Exit. Knocking within.
  MACBETH. Whence is that knocking?
    How is't with me, when every noise appals me?
    What hands are here? Ha, they pluck out mine eyes!
    Will all great Neptune's ocean wash this blood
    Clean from my hand? No, this my hand will rather
    The multitudinous seas incarnadine,
    Making the green one red.

                   Re-enter Lady Macbeth.

  LADY MACBETH. My hands are of your color, but I shame
    To wear a heart so white. [Knocking within.] I hear knocking
    At the south entry. Retire we to our chamber.
    A little water clears us of this deed.
    How easy is it then! Your constancy
    Hath left you unattended. [Knocking within.] Hark, more knocking.
    Get on your nightgown, lest occasion call us
    And show us to be watchers. Be not lost
    So poorly in your thoughts.
  MACBETH. To know my deed, 'twere best not know myself.
                                                Knocking within.
    Wake Duncan with thy knocking! I would thou couldst!
                                                         Exeunt.




SCENE III.
The same.

Enter a Porter. Knocking within.

  PORTER. Here's a knocking indeed! If a man were porter of Hell
    Gate, he should have old turning the key. [Knocking within.]
    Knock, knock, knock! Who's there, i' the name of Belzebub? Here's
    a farmer that hanged himself on th' expectation of plenty. Come
    in time! Have napkins enow about you; here you'll sweat fort.
    [Knocking within.] Knock, knock! Who's there, in th' other
    devil's name? Faith, here's an equivocator that could swear in
    both the scales against either scale, who committed treason
    enough for God's sake, yet could not equivocate to heaven. O,
    come in, equivocator. [Knocking within.] Knock, knock, knock!
    Who's there? Faith, here's an English tailor come hither, for
    stealing out of a French hose. Come in, tailor; here you may
    roast your goose. [Knocking within.] Knock, knock! Never at
    quiet! What are you? But this place is too cold for hell. I'll
    devil-porter it no further. I had thought to have let in some of
    all professions, that go the primrose way to the everlasting
    bonfire. [Knocking within.] Anon, anon! I pray you, remember the
    porter.
                                                 Opens the gate.

                       Enter Macduff and Lennox.

  MACDUFF. Was it so late, friend, ere you went to bed,
    That you do lie so late?
  PORTER. Faith, sir, we were carousing till the second cock; and
    drink, sir, is a great provoker of three things.
  MACDUFF. What three things does drink especially provoke?
  PORTER. Marry, sir, nose-painting, sleep, and urine. Lechery, sir,
    it provokes and unprovokes: it provokes the desire, but it takes
    away the performance. Therefore much drink may be said to be an
    equivocator with lechery: it makes him, and it mars him; it sets
    him on, and it takes him off; it persuades him and disheartens
    him; makes him stand to and not stand to; in conclusion,
    equivocates him in a sleep, and giving him the lie, leaves him.
  MACDUFF. I believe drink gave thee the lie last night.
  PORTER. That it did, sir, i' the very throat on me; but requited
    him for his lie, and, I think, being too strong for him, though
    he took up my legs sometime, yet I made shift to cast him.
  MACDUFF. Is thy master stirring?

                             Enter Macbeth.

    Our knocking has awaked him; here he comes.
  LENNOX. Good morrow, noble sir.
  MACBETH. morrow, both.
  MACDUFF. Is the King stirring, worthy Thane?
  MACBETH. Not yet.
  MACDUFF. He did command me to call timely on him;
    I have almost slipp'd the hour.
  MACBETH. I'll bring you to him.
  MACDUFF. I know this is a joyful trouble to you,
    But yet 'tis one.
  MACBETH. The labor we delight in physics pain.
    This is the door.
  MACDUFF I'll make so bold to call,
    For 'tis my limited service.                           Exit.
  LENNOX. Goes the King hence today?
  MACBETH. He does; he did appoint so.
  LENNOX. The night has been unruly. Where we lay,
    Our chimneys were blown down, and, as they say,
    Lamentings heard i' the air, strange screams of death,
    And prophesying with accents terrible
    Of dire combustion and confused events
    New hatch'd to the woeful time. The obscure bird
    Clamor'd the livelong night. Some say the earth
    Was feverous and did shake.
  MACBETH. 'Twas a rough fight.
  LENNOX. My young remembrance cannot parallel
    A fellow to it.

                      Re-enter Macduff.

  MACDUFF. O horror, horror, horror! Tongue nor heart
    Cannot conceive nor name thee.
  MACBETH. LENNOX. What's the matter?
  MACDUFF. Confusion now hath made his masterpiece.
    Most sacrilegious murther hath broke ope
    The Lord's anointed temple and stole thence
    The life o' the building.
  MACBETH. What is't you say? the life?
  LENNOX. Mean you his Majesty?
  MACDUFF. Approach the chamber, and destroy your sight
    With a new Gorgon. Do not bid me speak;
    See, and then speak yourselves.
                                      Exeunt Macbeth and Lennox.
    Awake, awake!
    Ring the alarum bell. Murther and treason!
    Banquo and Donalbain! Malcolm, awake!
    Shake off this downy sleep, death's counterfeit,
    And look on death itself! Up, up, and see
    The great doom's image! Malcolm! Banquo!
    As from your graves rise up, and walk like sprites
    To countenance this horror! Ring the bell.       Bell rings.

                     Enter Lady Macbeth.

  LADY MACBETH. What's the business,
    That such a hideous trumpet calls to parley
    The sleepers of the house? Speak, speak!
  MACDUFF. O gentle lady,
    'Tis not for you to hear what I can speak:
    The repetition in a woman's ear
    Would murther as it fell.

                     Enter Banquo.

    O Banquo, Banquo!
    Our royal master's murther'd.
  LADY MACBETH. Woe, alas!
    What, in our house?
  BANQUO. Too cruel anywhere.
    Dear Duff, I prithee, contradict thyself,
    And say it is not so.

          Re-enter Macbeth and Lennox, with Ross.

  MACBETH. Had I but died an hour before this chance,
    I had lived a blessed time, for from this instant
    There's nothing serious in mortality.
    All is but toys; renown and grace is dead,
    The wine of life is drawn, and the mere lees
    Is left this vault to brag of.

                Enter Malcolm and Donalbain.

  DONALBAIN. What is amiss?
  MACBETH. You are, and do not know't.
    The spring, the head, the fountain of your blood
    Is stopped, the very source of it is stopp'd.
  MACDUFF. Your royal father's murther'd.
   MALCOLM. O, by whom?
  LENNOX. Those of his chamber, as it seem'd, had done't.
    Their hands and faces were all badged with blood;
    So were their daggers, which unwiped we found
    Upon their pillows.
    They stared, and were distracted; no man's life
    Was to be trusted with them.
  MACBETH. O, yet I do repent me of my fury,
    That I did kill them.
  MACDUFF. Wherefore did you so?
  MACBETH. Who can be wise, amazed, temperate and furious,
    Loyal and neutral, in a moment? No man.
    The expedition of my violent love
    Outrun the pauser reason. Here lay Duncan,
    His silver skin laced with his golden blood,
    And his gash'd stabs look'd like a breach in nature
    For ruin's wasteful entrance; there, the murtherers,
    Steep'd in the colors of their trade, their daggers
    Unmannerly breech'd with gore. Who could refrain,
    That had a heart to love, and in that heart
    Courage to make 's love known?
  LADY MACBETH. Help me hence, ho!
  MACDUFF. Look to the lady.
  MALCOLM. [Aside to Donalbain.] Why do we hold our tongues,
    That most may claim this argument for ours?
  DONALBAIN. [Aside to Malcolm.] What should be spoken here, where
      our fate,
    Hid in an auger hole, may rush and seize us?
    Let's away,
    Our tears are not yet brew'd.
  MALCOLM. [Aside to Donalbain.] Nor our strong sorrow
    Upon the foot of motion.
  BANQUO. Look to the lady.
                                    Lady Macbeth is carried out.
    And when we have our naked frailties hid,
    That suffer in exposure, let us meet
    And question this most bloody piece of work
    To know it further. Fears and scruples shake us.
    In the great hand of God I stand, and thence
    Against the undivulged pretense I fight
    Of treasonous malice.
  MACDUFF. And so do I.
  ALL. So all.
  MACBETH. Let's briefly put on manly readiness
    And meet i' the hall together.
  ALL. Well contented.
                           Exeunt all but Malcolm and Donalbain.
  MALCOLM. What will you do? Let's not consort with them.
    To show an unfelt sorrow is an office
    Which the false man does easy. I'll to England.
  DONALBAIN. To Ireland, I; our separated fortune
    Shall keep us both the safer. Where we are
    There's daggers in men's smiles; the near in blood,
    The nearer bloody.
  MALCOLM. This murtherous shaft that's shot
    Hath not yet lighted, and our safest way
    Is to avoid the aim. Therefore to horse;
    And let us not be dainty of leave-taking,
    But shift away. There's warrant in that theft
    Which steals itself when there's no mercy left.
                                                         Exeunt.




SCENE IV.
Outside Macbeth's castle.

Enter Ross with an Old Man.

  OLD MAN. Threescore and ten I can remember well,
    Within the volume of which time I have seen
    Hours dreadful and things strange, but this sore night
    Hath trifled former knowings.
  ROSS. Ah, good father,
    Thou seest the heavens, as troubled with man's act,
    Threaten his bloody stage. By the clock 'tis day,
    And yet dark night strangles the traveling lamp.
    Is't night's predominance, or the day's shame,
    That darkness does the face of earth entomb,
    When living light should kiss it?
  OLD MAN. 'Tis unnatural,
    Even like the deed that's done. On Tuesday last
    A falcon towering in her pride of place
    Was by a mousing owl hawk'd at and kill'd.
  ROSS. And Duncan's horses-a thing most strange and certain-
    Beauteous and swift, the minions of their race,
    Turn'd wild in nature, broke their stalls, flung out,
    Contending 'gainst obedience, as they would make
    War with mankind.
  OLD MAN. 'Tis said they eat each other.
  ROSS. They did so, to the amazement of mine eyes
    That look'd upon't.

                     Enter Macduff.

    Here comes the good Macduff.
    How goes the world, sir, now?
  MACDUFF. Why, see you not?
  ROSS. Is't known who did this more than bloody deed?
  MACDUFF. Those that Macbeth hath slain.
  ROSS. Alas, the day!
    What good could they pretend?
  MACDUFF. They were suborn'd:
    Malcolm and Donalbain, the King's two sons,
    Are stol'n away and fled, which puts upon them
    Suspicion of the deed.
  ROSS. 'Gainst nature still!
    Thriftless ambition, that wilt ravin up
    Thine own life's means! Then 'tis most like
    The sovereignty will fall upon Macbeth.
  MACDUFF. He is already named, and gone to Scone
    To be invested.
  ROSS. Where is Duncan's body?
  MACDUFF. Carried to Colmekill,
    The sacred storehouse of his predecessors
    And guardian of their bones.
  ROSS. Will you to Scone?
  MACDUFF. No, cousin, I'll to Fife.
  ROSS. Well, I will thither.
  MACDUFF. Well, may you see things well done there.
    Adieu,
    Lest our old robes sit easier than our new!
  ROSS. Farewell, father.
  OLD MAN. God's benison go with you and with those
    That would make good of bad and friends of foes!
                                                         Exeunt.




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT III. SCENE I.
Forres. The palace.

Enter Banquo.

  BANQUO. Thou hast it now: King, Cawdor, Glamis, all,
    As the weird women promised, and I fear
    Thou play'dst most foully for't; yet it was said
    It should not stand in thy posterity,
    But that myself should be the root and father
    Of many kings. If there come truth from them
    (As upon thee, Macbeth, their speeches shine)
    Why, by the verities on thee made good,
    May they not be my oracles as well
    And set me up in hope? But hush, no more.

      Sennet sounds. Enter Macbeth as King, Lady Macbeth
    as Queen, Lennox, Ross, Lords, Ladies, and Attendants.

  MACBETH. Here's our chief guest.
  LADY MACBETH. If he had been forgotten,
    It had been as a gap in our great feast
    And all thing unbecoming.
  MACBETH. Tonight we hold a solemn supper, sir,
    And I'll request your presence.
  BANQUO. Let your Highness
    Command upon me, to the which my duties
    Are with a most indissoluble tie
    Forever knit.
  MACBETH. Ride you this afternoon?
  BANQUO. Ay, my good lord.
  MACBETH. We should have else desired your good advice,
    Which still hath been both grave and prosperous
    In this day's council; but we'll take tomorrow.
    Is't far you ride'!
  BANQUO. As far, my lord, as will fill up the time
    'Twixt this and supper. Go not my horse the better,
    I must become a borrower of the night
    For a dark hour or twain.
  MACBETH. Fail not our feast.
  BANQUO. My lord, I will not.
  MACBETH. We hear our bloody cousins are bestow'd
    In England and in Ireland, not confessing
    Their cruel parricide, filling their hearers
    With strange invention. But of that tomorrow,
    When therewithal we shall have cause of state
    Craving us jointly. Hie you to horse; adieu,
    Till you return at night. Goes Fleance with you?
  BANQUO. Ay, my good lord. Our time does call upon 's.
  MACBETH. I wish your horses swift and sure of foot,
    And so I do commend you to their backs.
    Farewell.                                       Exit Banquo.
    Let every man be master of his time
    Till seven at night; to make society
    The sweeter welcome, we will keep ourself
    Till supper time alone. While then, God be with you!
                        Exeunt all but Macbeth and an Attendant.
    Sirrah, a word with you. Attend those men
    Our pleasure?
  ATTENDANT. They are, my lord, without the palace gate.
  MACBETH. Bring them before us.                 Exit Attendant.
    To be thus is nothing,
    But to be safely thus. Our fears in Banquo.
    Stick deep, and in his royalty of nature
    Reigns that which would be fear'd. 'Tis much he dares,
    And, to that dauntless temper of his mind,
    He hath a wisdom that doth guide his valor
    To act in safety. There is none but he
    Whose being I do fear; and under him
    My genius is rebuked, as it is said
    Mark Antony's was by Caesar. He chid the sisters
    When first they put the name of King upon me
    And bade them speak to him; then prophet-like
    They hail'd him father to a line of kings.
    Upon my head they placed a fruitless crown
    And put a barren sceptre in my gripe,
    Thence to be wrench'd with an unlineal hand,
    No son of mine succeeding. If't be so,
    For Banquo's issue have I filed my mind,
    For them the gracious Duncan have I murther'd,
    Put rancors in the vessel of my peace
    Only for them, and mine eternal jewel
    Given to the common enemy of man,
    To make them kings -the seed of Banquo kings!
    Rather than so, come, Fate, into the list,
    And champion me to the utterance! Who's there?

        Re-enter Attendant, with two Murtherers.

    Now go to the door, and stay there till we call.
                                                 Exit Attendant.
    Was it not yesterday we spoke together?
  FIRST MURTHERER. It was, so please your Highness.
  MACBETH. Well then, now
    Have you consider'd of my speeches? Know
    That it was he in the times past which held you
    So under fortune, which you thought had been
    Our innocent self? This I made good to you
    In our last conference, pass'd in probation with you:
    How you were borne in hand, how cross'd, the instruments,
    Who wrought with them, and all things else that might
    To half a soul and to a notion crazed
    Say, "Thus did Banquo."
  FIRST MURTHERER. You made it known to us.
  MACBETH. I did so, and went further, which is now
    Our point of second meeting. Do you find
    Your patience so predominant in your nature,
    That you can let this go? Are you so gospel'd,
    To pray for this good man and for his issue,
    Whose heavy hand hath bow'd you to the grave
    And beggar'd yours forever?
  FIRST MURTHERER. We are men, my liege.
  MACBETH. Ay, in the catalogue ye go for men,
    As hounds and greyhounds, mongrels, spaniels, curs,
    Shoughs, waterrugs, and demi-wolves are clept
    All by the name of dogs. The valued file
    Distinguishes the swift, the slow, the subtle,
    The housekeeper, the hunter, every one
    According to the gift which bounteous nature
    Hath in him closed, whereby he does receive
    Particular addition, from the bill
    That writes them all alike; and so of men.
    Now if you have a station in the file,
    Not i' the worst rank of manhood, say it,
    And I will put that business in your bosoms
    Whose execution takes your enemy off,
    Grapples you to the heart and love of us,
    Who wear our health but sickly in his life,
    Which in his death were perfect.
  SECOND MURTHERER. I am one, my liege,
    Whom the vile blows and buffets of the world
    Have so incensed that I am reckless what
    I do to spite the world.
  FIRST MURTHERER. And I another
    So weary with disasters, tugg'd with fortune,
    That I would set my life on any chance,
    To mend it or be rid on't.
  MACBETH. Both of you
    Know Banquo was your enemy.
  BOTH MURTHERERS. True, my lord.
  MACBETH. So is he mine, and in such bloody distance
    That every minute of his being thrusts
    Against my near'st of life; and though I could
    With barefaced power sweep him from my sight
    And bid my will avouch it, yet I must not,
    For certain friends that are both his and mine,
    Whose loves I may not drop, but wail his fall
    Who I myself struck down. And thence it is
    That I to your assistance do make love,
    Masking the business from the common eye
    For sundry weighty reasons.
  SECOND MURTHERER. We shall, my lord,
    Perform what you command us.
  FIRST MURTHERER. Though our lives-
  MACBETH. Your spirits shine through you. Within this hour at most
    I will advise you where to plant yourselves,
    Acquaint you with the perfect spy o' the time,
    The moment on't; fort must be done tonight
    And something from the palace (always thought
    That I require a clearness); and with him-
    To leave no rubs nor botches in the work-
    Fleance his son, that keeps him company,
    Whose absence is no less material to me
    Than is his father's, must embrace the fate
    Of that dark hour. Resolve yourselves apart;
    I'll come to you anon.
  BOTH MURTHERERS. We are resolved, my lord.
  MACBETH. I'll call upon you straight. Abide within.
                                              Exeunt Murtherers.
    It is concluded: Banquo, thy soul's flight,
    If it find heaven, must find it out tonight.           Exit.




SCENE II.
The palace.

Enter Lady Macbeth and a Servant.

  LADY MACBETH. Is Banquo gone from court?
  SERVANT. Ay, madam, but returns again tonight.
  LADY MACBETH. Say to the King I would attend his leisure
    For a few words.
  SERVANT. Madam, I will.                                  Exit.
  LADY MACBETH. Nought's had, all's spent,
    Where our desire is got without content.
    'Tis safer to be that which we destroy
    Than by destruction dwell in doubtful joy.

                    Enter Macbeth.

    How now, my lord? Why do you keep alone,
    Of sorriest fancies your companions making,
    Using those thoughts which should indeed have died
    With them they think on? Things without all remedy
    Should be without regard. What's done is done.
  MACBETH. We have scotch'd the snake, not kill'd it.
    She'll close and be herself, whilst our poor malice
    Remains in danger of her former tooth.
    But let the frame of things disjoint, both the worlds suffer,
    Ere we will eat our meal in fear and sleep
    In the affliction of these terrible dreams
    That shake us nightly. Better be with the dead,
    Whom we, to gain our peace, have sent to peace,
    Than on the torture of the mind to lie
    In restless ecstasy. Duncan is in his grave;
    After life's fitful fever he sleeps well.
    Treason has done his worst; nor steel, nor poison,
    Malice domestic, foreign levy, nothing,
    Can touch him further.
  LADY MACBETH. Come on,
    Gentle my lord, sleek o'er your rugged looks;
    Be bright and jovial among your guests tonight.
  MACBETH. So shall I, love, and so, I pray, be you.
    Let your remembrance apply to Banquo;
    Present him eminence, both with eye and tongue:
    Unsafe the while, that we
    Must lave our honors in these flattering streams,
    And make our faces vizards to our hearts,
    Disguising what they are.
  LADY MACBETH. You must leave this.
  MACBETH. O, full of scorpions is my mind, dear wife!
    Thou know'st that Banquo and his Fleance lives.
  LADY MACBETH. But in them nature's copy's not eterne.
  MACBETH. There's comfort yet; they are assailable.
    Then be thou jocund. Ere the bat hath flown
    His cloister'd flight, ere to black Hecate's summons
    The shard-borne beetle with his drowsy hums
    Hath rung night's yawning peal, there shall be done
    A deed of dreadful note.
  LADY MACBETH. What's to be done?
  MACBETH. Be innocent of the knowledge, dearest chuck,
    Till thou applaud the deed. Come, seeling night,
    Scarf up the tender eye of pitiful day,
    And with thy bloody and invisible hand
    Cancel and tear to pieces that great bond
    Which keeps me pale! Light thickens, and the crow
    Makes wing to the rooky wood;
    Good things of day begin to droop and drowse,
    Whiles night's black agents to their preys do rouse.
    Thou marvel'st at my words, but hold thee still:
    Things bad begun make strong themselves by ill.
    So, prithee, go with me.                             Exeunt.




SCENE III.
A park near the palace.

Enter three Murtherers.

  FIRST MURTHERER. But who did bid thee join with us?
  THIRD MURTHERER. Macbeth.
  SECOND MURTHERER. He needs not our mistrust, since he delivers
    Our offices and what we have to do
    To the direction just.
  FIRST MURTHERER. Then stand with us.
    The west yet glimmers with some streaks of day;
    Now spurs the lated traveler apace
    To gain the timely inn, and near approaches
    The subject of our watch.
  THIRD MURTHERER. Hark! I hear horses.
  BANQUO. [Within.] Give us a light there, ho!
  SECOND MURTHERER. Then 'tis he; the rest
    That are within the note of expectation
    Already are i' the court.
  FIRST MURTHERER. His horses go about.
  THIRD MURTHERER. Almost a mile, but he does usually-
    So all men do -from hence to the palace gate
    Make it their walk.
  SECOND MURTHERER. A light, a light!

              Enter Banquo, and Fleance with a torch.

  THIRD MURTHERER. 'Tis he.
  FIRST MURTHERER. Stand to't.
  BANQUO. It will be rain tonight.
  FIRST MURTHERER. Let it come down.
                                           They set upon Banquo.
  BANQUO. O, treachery! Fly, good Fleance, fly, fly, fly!
    Thou mayst revenge. O slave!          Dies. Fleance escapes.
  THIRD MURTHERER. Who did strike out the light?
  FIRST MURTHERER. Wast not the way?
  THIRD MURTHERER. There's but one down; the son is fled.
  SECOND MURTHERER. We have lost
    Best half of our affair.
  FIRST MURTHERER. Well, let's away and say how much is done.
                                                         Exeunt.




SCENE IV.
A Hall in the palace. A banquet prepared.

Enter Macbeth, Lady Macbeth, Ross, Lennox, Lords, and Attendants.

  MACBETH. You know your own degrees; sit down. At first
    And last the hearty welcome.
  LORDS. Thanks to your Majesty.
  MACBETH. Ourself will mingle with society
    And play the humble host.
    Our hostess keeps her state, but in best time
    We will require her welcome.
  LADY MACBETH. Pronounce it for me, sir, to all our friends,
    For my heart speaks they are welcome.

                Enter first Murtherer to the door.

  MACBETH. See, they encounter thee with their hearts' thanks.
    Both sides are even; here I'll sit i' the midst.
    Be large in mirth; anon we'll drink a measure
    The table round. [Approaches the door.] There's blood upon thy
      face.
  MURTHERER. 'Tis Banquo's then.
  MACBETH. 'Tis better thee without than he within.
    Is he dispatch'd?
  MURTHERER. My lord, his throat is cut; that I did for him.
  MACBETH. Thou art the best o' the cut-throats! Yet he's good
    That did the like for Fleance. If thou didst it,
    Thou art the nonpareil.
  MURTHERER. Most royal sir,
    Fleance is 'scaped.
  MACBETH. [Aside.] Then comes my fit again. I had else been perfect,
    Whole as the marble, founded as the rock,
    As broad and general as the casing air;
    But now I am cabin'd, cribb'd, confin'd, bound in
    To saucy doubts and fears -But Banquo's safe?
  MURTHERER. Ay, my good lord. Safe in a ditch he bides,
    With twenty trenched gashes on his head,
    The least a death to nature.
  MACBETH. Thanks for that.
    There the grown serpent lies; the worm that's fled
    Hath nature that in time will venom breed,
    No teeth for the present. Get thee gone. Tomorrow
    We'll hear ourselves again.
                                                 Exit Murtherer.
  LADY MACBETH. My royal lord,
    You do not give the cheer. The feast is sold
    That is not often vouch'd, while 'tis amaking,
    'Tis given with welcome. To feed were best at home;
    From thence the sauce to meat is ceremony;
    Meeting were bare without it.
  MACBETH. Sweet remembrancer!
    Now good digestion wait on appetite,
    And health on both!
  LENNOX. May't please your Highness sit.

      The Ghost of Banquo enters and sits in Macbeth's place.

  MACBETH. Here had we now our country's honor roof'd,
    Were the graced person of our Banquo present,
    Who may I rather challenge for unkindness
    Than pity for mischance!
  ROSS. His absence, sir,
    Lays blame upon his promise. Please't your Highness
    To grace us with your royal company?
  MACBETH. The table's full.
  LENNOX. Here is a place reserved, sir.
  MACBETH. Where?
  LENNOX. Here, my good lord. What is't that moves your Highness?
  MACBETH. Which of you have done this?
  LORDS. What, my good lord?
  MACBETH. Thou canst not say I did it; never shake
    Thy gory locks at me.
  ROSS. Gentlemen, rise; his Highness is well.
  LADY MACBETH. Sit, worthy friends; my lord is often thus,
    And hath been from his youth. Pray you, keep seat.
    The fit is momentary; upon a thought
    He will again be well. If much you note him,
    You shall offend him and extend his passion.
    Feed, and regard him not-Are you a man?
  MACBETH. Ay, and a bold one, that dare look on that
    Which might appal the devil.
  LADY MACBETH. O proper stuff!
    This is the very painting of your fear;
    This is the air-drawn dagger which you said
    Led you to Duncan. O, these flaws and starts,
    Impostors to true fear, would well become
    A woman's story at a winter's fire,
    Authorized by her grandam. Shame itself!
    Why do you make such faces? When all's done,
    You look but on a stool.
  MACBETH. Prithee, see there! Behold! Look! Lo! How say you?
    Why, what care I? If thou canst nod, speak too.
    If charnel houses and our graves must send
    Those that we bury back, our monuments
    Shall be the maws of kites.                      Exit Ghost.
  LADY MACBETH. What, quite unmann'd in folly?
  MACBETH. If I stand here, I saw him.
  LADY MACBETH. Fie, for shame!
  MACBETH. Blood hath been shed ere now, i' the olden time,
    Ere humane statute purged the gentle weal;
    Ay, and since too, murthers have been perform'd
    Too terrible for the ear. The time has been,
    That, when the brains were out, the man would die,
    And there an end; but now they rise again,
    With twenty mortal murthers on their crowns,
    And push us from our stools. This is more strange
    Than such a murther is.
  LADY MACBETH. My worthy lord,
    Your noble friends do lack you.
  MACBETH. I do forget.
    Do not muse at me, my most worthy friends.
    I have a strange infirmity, which is nothing
    To those that know me. Come, love and health to all;
    Then I'll sit down. Give me some wine, fill full.
    I drink to the general joy o' the whole table,
    And to our dear friend Banquo, whom we miss.
    Would he were here! To all and him we thirst,
    And all to all.
  LORDS. Our duties and the pledge.

                     Re-enter Ghost.

  MACBETH. Avaunt, and quit my sight! Let the earth hide thee!
    Thy bones are marrowless, thy blood is cold;
    Thou hast no speculation in those eyes
    Which thou dost glare with.
  LADY MACBETH. Think of this, good peers,
    But as a thing of custom. 'Tis no other,
    Only it spoils the pleasure of the time.
  MACBETH. What man dare, I dare.
    Approach thou like the rugged Russian bear,
    The arm'd rhinoceros, or the Hyrcan tiger;
    Take any shape but that, and my firm nerves
    Shall never tremble. Or be alive again,
    And dare me to the desert with thy sword.
    If trembling I inhabit then, protest me
    The baby of a girl. Hence, horrible shadow!
    Unreal mockery, hence!                           Exit Ghost.
    Why, so, being gone,
    I am a man again. Pray you sit still.
  LADY MACBETH. You have displaced the mirth, broke the good meeting,
    With most admired disorder.
  MACBETH. Can such things be,
    And overcome us like a summer's cloud,
    Without our special wonder? You make me strange
    Even to the disposition that I owe
    When now I think you can behold such sights
    And keep the natural ruby of your cheeks
    When mine is blanch'd with fear.
  ROSS. What sights, my lord?
  LADY MACBETH. I pray you, speak not; he grows worse and worse;
    Question enrages him. At once, good night.
    Stand not upon the order of your going,
    But go at once.
  LENNOX. Good night, and better health
    Attend his Majesty!
  LADY MACBETH. A kind good night to all!
                        Exeunt all but Macbeth and Lady Macbeth.
  MACBETH. will have blood; they say blood will have blood.
    Stones have been known to move and trees to speak;
    Augures and understood relations have
    By maggot pies and choughs and rooks brought forth
    The secret'st man of blood. What is the night?
  LADY MACBETH. Almost at odds with morning, which is which.
  MACBETH. How say'st thou, that Macduff denies his person
    At our great bidding?
  LADY MACBETH. Did you send to him, sir?
  MACBETH. I hear it by the way, but I will send.
    There's not a one of them but in his house
    I keep a servant feed. I will tomorrow,
    And betimes I will, to the weird sisters.
    More shall they speak; for now I am bent to know,
    By the worst means, the worst. For mine own good
    All causes shall give way. I am in blood
    Stepp'd in so far that, should I wade no more,
    Returning were as tedious as go o'er.
    Strange things I have in head that will to hand,
    Which must be acted ere they may be scann'd.
  LADY MACBETH. You lack the season of all natures, sleep.
  MACBETH. Come, we'll to sleep. My strange and self-abuse
    Is the initiate fear that wants hard use.
    We are yet but young in deed.                       Exeunt.




SCENE V.
A heath. Thunder.

Enter the three Witches, meeting Hecate.

  FIRST WITCH. Why, how now, Hecate? You look angerly.
  HECATE. Have I not reason, beldams as you are,
    Saucy and overbold? How did you dare
    To trade and traffic with Macbeth
    In riddles and affairs of death,
    And I, the mistress of your charms,
    The close contriver of all harms,
    Was never call'd to bear my part,
    Or show the glory of our art?
    And, which is worse, all you have done
    Hath been but for a wayward son,
    Spiteful and wrathful, who, as others do,
    Loves for his own ends, not for you.
    But make amends now. Get you gone,
    And at the pit of Acheron
    Meet me i' the morning. Thither he
    Will come to know his destiny.
    Your vessels and your spells provide,
    Your charms and everything beside.
    I am for the air; this night I'll spend
    Unto a dismal and a fatal end.
    Great business must be wrought ere noon:
    Upon the corner of the moon
    There hangs a vaporous drop profound;
    I'll catch it ere it come to ground.
    And that distill'd by magic sleights
    Shall raise such artificial sprites
    As by the strength of their illusion
    Shall draw him on to his confusion.
    He shall spurn fate, scorn death, and bear
    His hopes 'bove wisdom, grace, and fear.
    And you all know security
    Is mortals' chiefest enemy.
                                        Music and a song within,
                                         "Come away, come away."
    Hark! I am call'd; my little spirit, see,
    Sits in a foggy cloud and stays for me.                Exit.
  FIRST WITCH. Come, let's make haste; she'll soon be back again.
                                                         Exeunt.




SCENE VI.
Forres. The palace.

Enter Lennox and another Lord.

  LENNOX. My former speeches have but hit your thoughts,
    Which can interpret farther; only I say
    Thing's have been strangely borne. The gracious Duncan
    Was pitied of Macbeth; marry, he was dead.
    And the right valiant Banquo walk'd too late,
    Whom, you may say, if't please you, Fleance kill'd,
    For Fleance fled. Men must not walk too late.
    Who cannot want the thought, how monstrous
    It was for Malcolm and for Donalbain
    To kill their gracious father? Damned fact!
    How it did grieve Macbeth! Did he not straight,
    In pious rage, the two delinquents tear
    That were the slaves of drink and thralls of sleep?
    Was not that nobly done? Ay, and wisely too,
    For 'twould have anger'd any heart alive
    To hear the men deny't. So that, I say,
    He has borne all things well; and I do think
    That, had he Duncan's sons under his key-
    As, an't please heaven, he shall not -they should find
    What 'twere to kill a father; so should Fleance.
    But, peace! For from broad words, and 'cause he fail'd
    His presence at the tyrant's feast, I hear,
    Macduff lives in disgrace. Sir, can you tell
    Where he bestows himself?
  LORD. The son of Duncan,
    From whom this tyrant holds the due of birth,
    Lives in the English court and is received
    Of the most pious Edward with such grace
    That the malevolence of fortune nothing
    Takes from his high respect. Thither Macduff
    Is gone to pray the holy King, upon his aid
    To wake Northumberland and warlike Siward;
    That by the help of these, with Him above
    To ratify the work, we may again
    Give to our tables meat, sleep to our nights,
    Free from our feasts and banquets bloody knives,
    Do faithful homage, and receive free honors-
    All which we pine for now. And this report
    Hath so exasperate the King that he
    Prepares for some attempt of war.
  LENNOX. Sent he to Macduff?
  LORD. He did, and with an absolute "Sir, not I,"
    The cloudy messenger turns me his back,
    And hums, as who should say, "You'll rue the time
    That clogs me with this answer."
  LENNOX. And that well might
    Advise him to a caution, to hold what distance
    His wisdom can provide. Some holy angel
    Fly to the court of England and unfold
    His message ere he come, that a swift blessing
    May soon return to this our suffering country
    Under a hand accursed!
  LORD. I'll send my prayers with him.
                                                         Exeunt.




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT IV. SCENE I.
A cavern. In the middle, a boiling cauldron. Thunder.

Enter the three Witches.
  FIRST WITCH. Thrice the brinded cat hath mew'd.
  SECOND WITCH. Thrice and once the hedge-pig whined.
  THIRD WITCH. Harpier cries, "'Tis time, 'tis time."
  FIRST WITCH. Round about the cauldron go;
    In the poison'd entrails throw.
    Toad, that under cold stone
    Days and nights has thirty-one
    Swelter'd venom sleeping got,
    Boil thou first i' the charmed pot.
  ALL. Double, double, toil and trouble;
    Fire burn and cauldron bubble.
  SECOND WITCH. Fillet of a fenny snake,
    In the cauldron boil and bake;
    Eye of newt and toe of frog,
    Wool of bat and tongue of dog,
    Adder's fork and blind-worm's sting,
    Lizard's leg and howlet's wing,
    For a charm of powerful trouble,
    Like a hell-broth boil and bubble.
  ALL. Double, double, toil and trouble;
    Fire burn and cauldron bubble.
  THIRD WITCH. Scale of dragon, tooth of wolf,
    Witch's mummy, maw and gulf
    Of the ravin'd salt-sea shark,
    Root of hemlock digg'd i' the dark,
    Liver of blaspheming Jew,
    Gall of goat and slips of yew
    Sliver'd in the moon's eclipse,
    Nose of Turk and Tartar's lips,
    Finger of birth-strangled babe
    Ditch-deliver'd by a drab,
    Make the gruel thick and slab.
    Add thereto a tiger's chawdron,
    For the ingredients of our cawdron.
  ALL. Double, double, toil and trouble;
    Fire burn and cauldron bubble.
  SECOND WITCH. Cool it with a baboon's blood,
    Then the charm is firm and good.

            Enter Hecate to the other three Witches.

  HECATE. O, well done! I commend your pains,
    And everyone shall share i' the gains.
    And now about the cauldron sing,
    Like elves and fairies in a ring,
    Enchanting all that you put in.
                              Music and a song, "Black spirits."
                                                 Hecate retires.
  SECOND WITCH. By the pricking of my thumbs,
    Something wicked this way comes.
    Open, locks,
    Whoever knocks!

                      Enter Macbeth.

  MACBETH. How now, you secret, black, and midnight hags?
    What is't you do?
  ALL. A deed without a name.
  MACBETH. I conjure you, by that which you profess
    (Howeer you come to know it) answer me:
    Though you untie the winds and let them fight
    Against the churches, though the yesty waves
    Confound and swallow navigation up,
    Though bladed corn be lodged and trees blown down,
    Though castles topple on their warders' heads,
    Though palaces and pyramids do slope
    Their heads to their foundations, though the treasure
    Of nature's germaines tumble all together
    Even till destruction sicken, answer me
    To what I ask you.
  FIRST WITCH. Speak.
  SECOND WITCH. Demand.
  THIRD WITCH. We'll answer.
  FIRST WITCH. Say, if thou'dst rather hear it from our mouths,
    Or from our masters'?
  MACBETH. Call 'em, let me see 'em.
  FIRST WITCH. Pour in sow's blood that hath eaten
    Her nine farrow; grease that's sweaten
    From the murtherer's gibbet throw
    Into the flame.
  ALL. Come, high or low;
    Thyself and office deftly show!

            Thunder. First Apparition: an armed Head.

  MACBETH. Tell me, thou unknown power-
  FIRST WITCH. He knows thy thought:
    Hear his speech, but say thou nought.
  FIRST APPARITION. Macbeth! Macbeth! Macbeth! Beware Macduff,
    Beware the Thane of Fife. Dismiss me. Enough.
                                                       Descends.
  MACBETH. Whate'er thou art, for thy good caution, thanks;
    Thou hast harp'd my fear aright. But one word more-
  FIRST WITCH. He will not be commanded. Here's another,
    More potent than the first.

          Thunder. Second Apparition: a bloody Child.

  SECOND APPARITION. Macbeth! Macbeth! Macbeth!
  MACBETH. Had I three ears, I'd hear thee.
  SECOND APPARITION. Be bloody, bold, and resolute: laugh to scorn
    The power of man, for none of woman born
    Shall harm Macbeth.                                Descends.
  MACBETH. Then live, Macduff. What need I fear of thee?
    But yet I'll make assurance double sure,
    And take a bond of fate: thou shalt not live,
    That I may tell pale-hearted fear it lies,
    And sleep in spite of thunder.

       Thunder. Third Apparition: a Child crowned,
               with a tree in his hand.

    What is this,
    That rises like the issue of a king,
    And wears upon his baby brow the round
    And top of sovereignty?
  ALL. Listen, but speak not to't.
  THIRD APPARITION. Be lion-mettled, proud, and take no care
    Who chafes, who frets, or where conspirers are.
    Macbeth shall never vanquish'd be until
    Great Birnam Wood to high Dunsinane Hill
    Shall come against him.                            Descends.
  MACBETH. That will never be.
    Who can impress the forest, bid the tree
    Unfix his earth-bound root? Sweet bodements, good!
    Rebellion's head, rise never till the Wood
    Of Birnam rise, and our high-placed Macbeth
    Shall live the lease of nature, pay his breath
    To time and mortal custom. Yet my heart
    Throbs to know one thing: tell me, if your art
    Can tell so much, shall Banquo's issue ever
    Reign in this kingdom?
  ALL. Seek to know no more.
  MACBETH. I will be satisfied! Deny me this,
    And an eternal curse fall on you! Let me know.
    Why sinks that cauldron, and what noise is this?
                                                       Hautboys.
  FIRST WITCH. Show!
  SECOND WITCH. Show!
  THIRD. WITCH. Show!
  ALL. Show his eyes, and grieve his heart;
    Come like shadows, so depart!

    A show of eight Kings, the last with a glass in his hand;
                   Banquo's Ghost following.

  MACBETH. Thou are too like the spirit of Banquo Down!
    Thy crown does sear mine eyeballs. And thy hair,
    Thou other gold-bound brow, is like the first.
    A third is like the former. Filthy hags!
    Why do you show me this? A fourth! Start, eyes!
    What, will the line stretch out to the crack of doom?
    Another yet! A seventh! I'll see no more!
    And yet the eighth appears, who bears a glass
    Which shows me many more; and some I see
    That twofold balls and treble sceptres carry.
    Horrible sight! Now I see 'tis true;
    For the blood-bolter'd Banquo smiles upon me,
    And points at them for his. What, is this so?
  FIRST WITCH. Ay, sir, all this is so. But why
    Stands Macbeth thus amazedly?
    Come,sisters, cheer we up his sprites,
    And show the best of our delights.
    I'll charm the air to give a sound,
    While you perform your antic round,
    That this great King may kindly say
    Our duties did his welcome pay.
                                    Music. The Witches dance and
                                        then vanish with Hecate.
  MACBETH. are they? Gone? Let this pernicious hour
    Stand ay accursed in the calendar!
    Come in, without there!

                    Enter Lennox.

  LENNOX. What's your Grace's will?
  MACBETH. Saw you the weird sisters?
  LENNOX. No, my lord.
  MACBETH. Came they not by you?
  LENNOX. No indeed, my lord.
  MACBETH. Infected be the 'air whereon they ride,
    And damn'd all those that trust them! I did hear
    The galloping of horse. Who wast came by?
  LENNOX. 'Tis two or three, my lord, that bring you word
    Macduff is fled to England.
  MACBETH. Fled to England?
  LENNOX. Ay, my good lord.
  MACBETH. [Aside.] Time, thou anticipatest my dread exploits.
    The flighty purpose never is o'ertook
    Unless the deed go with it. From this moment
    The very firstlings of my heart shall be
    The firstlings of my hand. And even now,
    To crown my thoughts with acts, be it thought and done:
    The castle of Macduff I will surprise,
    Seize upon Fife, give to the edge o' the sword
    His wife, his babes, and all unfortunate souls
    That trace him in his line. No boasting like a fool;
    This deed I'll do before this purpose cool.
    But no more sights! -Where are these gentlemen?
    Come, bring me where they are.                       Exeunt.




SCENE II.
Fife. Macduff's castle.

Enter Lady Macduff, her Son, and Ross.

  LADY MACDUFF. What had he done, to make him fly the land?
  ROSS. You must have patience, madam.
  LADY MACDUFF. He had none;
    His flight was madness. When our actions do not,
    Our fears do make us traitors.
  ROSS. You know not
    Whether it was his wisdom or his fear.
  LADY MACDUFF. Wisdom? To leave his wife, to leave his babes,
    His mansion, and his titles, in a place
    From whence himself does fly? He loves us not;
    He wants the natural touch; for the poor wren,
    The most diminutive of birds, will fight,
    Her young ones in her nest, against the owl.
    All is the fear and nothing is the love;
    As little is the wisdom, where the flight
    So runs against all reason.
  ROSS. My dearest coz,
    I pray you, school yourself. But for your husband,
    He is noble, wise, Judicious, and best knows
    The fits o' the season. I dare not speak much further;
    But cruel are the times when we are traitors
    And do not know ourselves; when we hold rumor
    From what we fear, yet know not what we fear,
    But float upon a wild and violent sea
    Each way and move. I take my leave of you;
    Shall not be long but I'll be here again.
    Things at the worst will cease or else climb upward
    To what they were before. My pretty cousin,
    Blessing upon you!
  LADY MACDUFF. Father'd he is, and yet he's fatherless.
  ROSS. I am so much a fool, should I stay longer,
    It would be my disgrace and your discomfort.
    I take my leave at once.                               Exit.
  LADY MACDUFF. Sirrah, your father's dead.
    And what will you do now? How will you live?
  SON. As birds do, Mother.
  LADY MACDUFF. What, with worms and flies?
  SON. With what I get, I mean; and so do they.
  LADY MACDUFF. Poor bird! Thou'ldst never fear the net nor lime,
    The pitfall nor the gin.
  SON. Why should I, Mother? Poor birds they are not set for.
    My father is not dead, for all your saying.
  LADY MACDUFF. Yes, he is dead. How wilt thou do for father?
  SON. Nay, how will you do for a husband?
  LADY MACDUFF. Why, I can buy me twenty at any market.
  SON. Then you'll buy 'em to sell again.
  LADY MACDUFF. Thou speak'st with all thy wit, and yet, i' faith,
    With wit enough for thee.
  SON. Was my father a traitor, Mother?
  LADY MACDUFF. Ay, that he was.
  SON. What is a traitor?
  LADY MACDUFF. Why one that swears and lies.
  SON. And be all traitors that do so?
  LADY MACDUFF. Everyone that does so is a traitor and must be
     hanged.
  SON. And must they all be hanged that swear and lie?
  LADY MACDUFF. Everyone.
  SON. Who must hang them?
  LADY MACDUFF. Why, the honest men.
  SON. Then the liars and swearers are fools, for there are liars and
    swearers enow to beat the honest men and hang up them.
  LADY MACDUFF. Now, God help thee, poor monkey! But how wilt thou do
    for a father?
  SON. If he were dead, you'ld weep for him; if you would not, it
    were a good sign that I should quickly have a new father.
  LADY MACDUFF. Poor prattler, how thou talk'st!

                    Enter a Messenger.

  MESSENGER. Bless you, fair dame! I am not to you known,
    Though in your state of honor I am perfect.
    I doubt some danger does approach you nearly.
    If you will take a homely man's advice,
    Be not found here; hence, with your little ones.
    To fright you thus, methinks I am too savage;
    To do worse to you were fell cruelty,
    Which is too nigh your person. Heaven preserve you!
    I dare abide no longer.                                Exit.
  LADY MACDUFF. Whither should I fly?
    I have done no harm. But I remember now
    I am in this earthly world, where to do harm
    Is often laudable, to do good sometime
    Accounted dangerous folly. Why then, alas,
    Do I put up that womanly defense,
    To say I have done no harm -What are these faces?

                      Enter Murtherers.

  FIRST MURTHERER. Where is your husband?
  LADY MACDUFF. I hope, in no place so unsanctified
    Where such as thou mayst find him.
  FIRST MURTHERER. He's a traitor.
  SON. Thou liest, thou shag-ear'd villain!
  FIRST MURTHERER. What, you egg!
                                                      Stabs him.
    Young fry of treachery!
  SON. He has kill'd me, Mother.
    Run away, I pray you!                                  Dies.
                            Exit Lady Macduff, crying "Murther!"
                               Exeunt Murtherers, following her.




SCENE III.
England. Before the King's palace.

Enter Malcolm and Macduff.

  MALCOLM. Let us seek out some desolate shade and there
    Weep our sad bosoms empty.
  MACDUFF. Let us rather
    Hold fast the mortal sword, and like good men
    Bestride our downfall'n birthdom. Each new morn
    New widows howl, new orphans cry, new sorrows
    Strike heaven on the face, that it resounds
    As if it felt with Scotland and yell'd out
    Like syllable of dolor.
  MALCOLM. What I believe, I'll wall;
    What know, believe; and what I can redress,
    As I shall find the time to friend, I will.
    What you have spoke, it may be so perchance.
    This tyrant, whose sole name blisters our tongues,
    Was once thought honest. You have loved him well;
    He hath not touch'd you yet. I am young, but something
    You may deserve of him through me, and wisdom
    To offer up a weak, poor, innocent lamb
    To appease an angry god.
  MACDUFF. I am not treacherous.
  MALCOLM. But Macbeth is.
    A good and virtuous nature may recoil
    In an imperial charge. But I shall crave your pardon;
    That which you are, my thoughts cannot transpose.
    Angels are bright still, though the brightest fell.
    Though all things foul would wear the brows of grace,
    Yet grace must still look so.
  MACDUFF. I have lost my hopes.
  MALCOLM. Perchance even there where I did find my doubts.
    Why in that rawness left you wife and child,
    Those precious motives, those strong knots of love,
    Without leave-taking? I pray you,
    Let not my jealousies be your dishonors,
    But mine own safeties. You may be rightly just,
    Whatever I shall think.
  MACDUFF. Bleed, bleed, poor country!
    Great tyranny, lay thou thy basis sure,
    For goodness dare not check thee. Wear thou thy wrongs;
    The title is affeer'd. Fare thee well, lord.
    I would not be the villain that thou think'st
    For the whole space that's in the tyrant's grasp
    And the rich East to boot.
  MALCOLM. Be not offended;
    I speak not as in absolute fear of you.
    I think our country sinks beneath the yoke;
    It weeps, it bleeds, and each new day a gash
    Is added to her wounds. I think withal
    There would be hands uplifted in my right;
    And here from gracious England have I offer
    Of goodly thousands. But for all this,
    When I shall tread upon the tyrant's head,
    Or wear it on my sword, yet my poor country
    Shall have more vices than it had before,
    More suffer and more sundry ways than ever,
    By him that shall succeed.
  MACDUFF. What should he be?
  MALCOLM. It is myself I mean, in whom I know
    All the particulars of vice so grafted
    That, when they shall be open'd, black Macbeth
    Will seem as pure as snow, and the poor state
    Esteem him as a lamb, being compared
    With my confineless harms.
  MACDUFF. Not in the legions
    Of horrid hell can come a devil more damn'd
    In evils to top Macbeth.
  MALCOLM. I grant him bloody,
    Luxurious, avaricious, false, deceitful,
    Sudden, malicious, smacking of every sin
    That has a name. But there's no bottom, none,
    In my voluptuousness. Your wives, your daughters,
    Your matrons, and your maids could not fill up
    The cestern of my lust, and my desire
    All continent impediments would o'erbear
    That did oppose my will. Better Macbeth
    Than such an one to reign.
  MACDUFF. Boundless intemperance
    In nature is a tyranny; it hath been
    The untimely emptying of the happy throne,
    And fall of many kings. But fear not yet
    To take upon you what is yours. You may
    Convey your pleasures in a spacious plenty
    And yet seem cold, the time you may so hoodwink.
    We have willing dames enough; there cannot be
    That vulture in you to devour so many
    As will to greatness dedicate themselves,
    Finding it so inclined.
  MALCOLM. With this there grows
    In my most ill-composed affection such
    A stanchless avarice that, were I King,
    I should cut off the nobles for their lands,
    Desire his jewels and this other's house,
    And my more-having would be as a sauce
    To make me hunger more, that I should forge
    Quarrels unjust against the good and loyal,
    Destroying them for wealth.
  MACDUFF. This avarice
    Sticks deeper, grows with more pernicious root
    Than summer-seeming lust, and it hath been
    The sword of our slain kings. Yet do not fear;
    Scotland hath foisons to fill up your will
    Of your mere own. All these are portable,
    With other graces weigh'd.
  MALCOLM. But I have none. The king-becoming graces,
    As justice, verity, temperance, stableness,
    Bounty, perseverance, mercy, lowliness,
    Devotion, patience, courage, fortitude,
    I have no relish of them, but abound
    In the division of each several crime,
    Acting it many ways. Nay, had I power, I should
    Pour the sweet milk of concord into hell,
    Uproar the universal peace, confound
    All unity on earth.
  MACDUFF. O Scotland, Scotland!
  MALCOLM. If such a one be fit to govern, speak.
    I am as I have spoken.
  MACDUFF. Fit to govern?
    No, not to live. O nation miserable!
    With an untitled tyrant bloody-scepter'd,
    When shalt thou see thy wholesome days again,
    Since that the truest issue of thy throne
    By his own interdiction stands accursed
    And does blaspheme his breed? Thy royal father
    Was a most sainted king; the queen that bore thee,
    Oftener upon her knees than on her feet,
    Died every day she lived. Fare thee well!
    These evils thou repeat'st upon thyself
    Have banish'd me from Scotland. O my breast,
    Thy hope ends here!
  MALCOLM. Macduff, this noble passion,
    Child of integrity, hath from my soul
    Wiped the black scruples, reconciled my thoughts
    To thy good truth and honor. Devilish Macbeth
    By many of these trains hath sought to win me
    Into his power, and modest wisdom plucks me
    From over-credulous haste. But God above
    Deal between thee and me! For even now
    I put myself to thy direction and
    Unspeak mine own detraction; here abjure
    The taints and blames I laid upon myself,
    For strangers to my nature. I am yet
    Unknown to woman, never was forsworn,
    Scarcely have coveted what was mine own,
    At no time broke my faith, would not betray
    The devil to his fellow, and delight
    No less in truth than life. My first false speaking
    Was this upon myself. What I am truly
    Is thine and my poor country's to command.
    Whither indeed, before thy here-approach,
    Old Siward, with ten thousand warlike men
    Already at a point, was setting forth.
    Now we'll together, and the chance of goodness
    Be like our warranted quarrel! Why are you silent?
  MACDUFF. Such welcome and unwelcome things at once
    'Tis hard to reconcile.

                     Enter a Doctor.

  MALCOLM. Well, more anon. Comes the King forth, I pray you?
  DOCTOR. Ay, sir, there are a crew of wretched souls
    That stay his cure. Their malady convinces
    The great assay of art, but at his touch,
    Such sanctity hath heaven given his hand,
    They presently amend.
  MALCOLM. I thank you, Doctor.                     Exit Doctor.
  MACDUFF. What's the disease he means?
  MALCOLM. 'Tis call'd the evil:
    A most miraculous work in this good King,
    Which often, since my here-remain in England,
    I have seen him do. How he solicits heaven,
    Himself best knows; but strangely-visited people,
    All swol'n and ulcerous, pitiful to the eye,
    The mere despair of surgery, he cures,
    Hanging a golden stamp about their necks
    Put on with holy prayers; and 'tis spoken,
    To the succeeding royalty he leaves
    The healing benediction. With this strange virtue
    He hath a heavenly gift of prophecy,
    And sundry blessings hang about his throne
    That speak him full of grace.

                    Enter Ross.

  MACDUFF. See, who comes here?
  MALCOLM. My countryman, but yet I know him not.
  MACDUFF. My ever gentle cousin, welcome hither.
  MALCOLM. I know him now. Good God, betimes remove
    The means that makes us strangers!
  ROSS. Sir, amen.
  MACDUFF. Stands Scotland where it did?
  ROSS. Alas, poor country,
    Almost afraid to know itself! It cannot
    Be call'd our mother, but our grave. Where nothing,
    But who knows nothing, is once seen to smile;
    Where sighs and groans and shrieks that rend the air,
    Are made, not mark'd; where violent sorrow seems
    A modern ecstasy. The dead man's knell
    Is there scarce ask'd for who, and good men's lives
    Expire before the flowers in their caps,
    Dying or ere they sicken.
  MACDUFF. O, relation
    Too nice, and yet too true!
  MALCOLM. What's the newest grief?
  ROSS. That of an hour's age doth hiss the speaker;
    Each minute teems a new one.
  MACDUFF. How does my wife?
  ROSS. Why, well.
  MACDUFF. And all my children?
  ROSS. Well too.
  MACDUFF. The tyrant has not batter'd at their peace?
  ROSS. No, they were well at peace when I did leave 'em.
  MACDUFF. Be not a niggard of your speech. How goest?
  ROSS. When I came hither to transport the tidings,
    Which I have heavily borne, there ran a rumor
    Of many worthy fellows that were out,
    Which was to my belief witness'd the rather,
    For that I saw the tyrant's power afoot.
    Now is the time of help; your eye in Scotland
    Would create soldiers, make our women fight,
    To doff their dire distresses.
  MALCOLM. Be't their comfort
    We are coming thither. Gracious England hath
    Lent us good Siward and ten thousand men;
    An older and a better soldier none
    That Christendom gives out.
  ROSS. Would I could answer
    This comfort with the like! But I have words
    That would be howl'd out in the desert air,
    Where hearing should not latch them.
  MACDUFF. What concern they?
    The general cause? Or is it a fee-grief
    Due to some single breast?
  ROSS. No mind that's honest
    But in it shares some woe, though the main part
    Pertains to you alone.
  MACDUFF. If it be mine,
    Keep it not from me, quickly let me have it.
  ROSS. Let not your ears despise my tongue forever,
    Which shall possess them with the heaviest sound
    That ever yet they heard.
  MACDUFF. Humh! I guess at it.
  ROSS. Your castle is surprised; your wife and babes
    Savagely slaughter'd. To relate the manner
    Were, on the quarry of these murther'd deer,
    To add the death of you.
  MALCOLM. Merciful heaven!
    What, man! Neer pull your hat upon your brows;
    Give sorrow words. The grief that does not speak
    Whispers the o'erfraught heart, and bids it break.
  MACDUFF. My children too?
  ROSS. Wife, children, servants, all
    That could be found.
  MACDUFF. And I must be from thence!
    My wife kill'd too?
  ROSS. I have said.
  MALCOLM. Be comforted.
    Let's make us medicines of our great revenge,
    To cure this deadly grief.
  MACDUFF. He has no children. All my pretty ones?
    Did you say all? O hell-kite! All?
    What, all my pretty chickens and their dam
    At one fell swoop?
  MALCOLM. Dispute it like a man.
  MACDUFF. I shall do so,
    But I must also feel it as a man.
    I cannot but remember such things were
    That were most precious to me. Did heaven look on,
    And would not take their part? Sinful Macduff,
    They were all struck for thee! Naught that I am,
    Not for their own demerits, but for mine,
    Fell slaughter on their souls. Heaven rest them now!
  MALCOLM. Be this the whetstone of your sword. Let grief
    Convert to anger; blunt not the heart, enrage it.
  MACDUFF. O, I could play the woman with mine eyes
    And braggart with my tongue! But, gentle heavens,
    Cut short all intermission; front to front
    Bring thou this fiend of Scotland and myself;
    Within my sword's length set him; if he 'scape,
    Heaven forgive him too!
  MALCOLM. This tune goes manly.
    Come, go we to the King; our power is ready,
    Our lack is nothing but our leave. Macbeth
    Is ripe for shaking, and the powers above
    Put on their instruments. Receive what cheer you may,
    The night is long that never finds the day.          Exeunt.




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT V. SCENE I.
Dunsinane. Anteroom in the castle.

Enter a Doctor of Physic and a Waiting Gentlewoman.

  DOCTOR. I have two nights watched with you, but can perceive no
    truth in your report. When was it she last walked?
  GENTLEWOMAN. Since his Majesty went into the field, have seen her
    rise from her bed, throw her nightgown upon her, unlock her
    closet, take forth paper, fold it, write upon't, read it,
    afterwards seal it, and again return to bed; yet all this while
    in a most fast sleep.
  DOCTOR. A great perturbation in nature, to receive at once the
    benefit of sleep and do the effects of watching! In this slumbery
    agitation, besides her walking and other actual performances,
    what, at any time, have you heard her say?
  GENTLEWOMAN. That, sir, which I will not report after her.
  DOCTOR. You may to me, and 'tis most meet you should.
  GENTLEWOMAN. Neither to you nor anyone, having no witness to
    confirm my speech.

                Enter Lady Macbeth with a taper.

    Lo you, here she comes! This is her very guise, and, upon my
    life, fast asleep. Observe her; stand close.
  DOCTOR. How came she by that light?
  GENTLEWOMAN. Why, it stood by her. She has light by her
     continually; 'tis her command.
  DOCTOR. You see, her eyes are open.
  GENTLEWOMAN. Ay, but their sense is shut.
  DOCTOR. What is it she does now? Look how she rubs her hands.
  GENTLEWOMAN. It is an accustomed action with her, to seem thus
    washing her hands. I have known her continue in this a quarter of
    an hour.
  LADY MACBETH. Yet here's a spot.
  DOCTOR. Hark, she speaks! I will set down what comes from her, to
    satisfy my remembrance the more strongly.
  LADY MACBETH. Out, damned spot! Out, I say! One- two -why then 'tis
    time to do't. Hell is murky. Fie, my lord, fie! A soldier, and
    afeard? What need we fear who knows it, when none can call our
    power to account? Yet who would have thought the old man to have
    had so much blood in him?
  DOCTOR. Do you mark that?
  LADY MACBETH. The Thane of Fife had a wife; where is she now? What,
    will these hands neer be clean? No more o' that, my lord, no more
    o' that. You mar all with this starting.
  DOCTOR. Go to, go to; you have known what you should not.
  GENTLEWOMAN. She has spoke what she should not, I am sure of that.
    Heaven knows what she has known.
  LADY MACBETH. Here's the smell of the blood still. All the perfumes
    of Arabia will not sweeten this little hand. Oh, oh, oh!
  DOCTOR. What a sigh is there! The heart is sorely charged.
  GENTLEWOMAN. I would not have such a heart in my bosom for the
    dignity of the whole body.
  DOCTOR. Well, well, well-
  GENTLEWOMAN. Pray God it be, sir.
  DOCTOR. This disease is beyond my practice. Yet I have known those
    which have walked in their sleep who have died holily in their
    beds.
  LADY MACBETH. Wash your hands, put on your nightgown, look not so
    pale. I tell you yet again, Banquo's buried; he cannot come out
    on's grave.
  DOCTOR. Even so?
  LADY MACBETH. To bed, to bed; there's knocking at the gate. Come,
    come, come, come, give me your hand.What's done cannot be undone.
    To bed, to bed, to bed.
Exit.
  DOCTOR. Will she go now to bed?
  GENTLEWOMAN. Directly.
  DOCTOR. Foul whisperings are abroad. Unnatural deeds
    Do breed unnatural troubles; infected minds
    To their deaf pillows will discharge their secrets.
    More needs she the divine than the physician.
    God, God, forgive us all! Look after her;
    Remove from her the means of all annoyance,
    And still keep eyes upon her. So good night.
    My mind she has mated and amazed my sight.
    I think, but dare not speak.
  GENTLEWOMAN. Good night, good doctor.
                                                         Exeunt.




SCENE II.
The country near Dunsinane. Drum and colors.

Enter Menteith, Caithness, Angus, Lennox, and Soldiers.

  MENTEITH. The English power is near, led on by Malcolm,
    His uncle Siward, and the good Macduff.
    Revenges burn in them, for their dear causes
    Would to the bleeding and the grim alarm
    Excite the mortified man.
  ANGUS. Near Birnam Wood
    Shall we well meet them; that way are they coming.
  CAITHNESS. Who knows if Donalbain be with his brother?
  LENNOX. For certain, sir, he is not; I have a file
    Of all the gentry. There is Seward's son
    And many unrough youths that even now
    Protest their first of manhood.
  MENTEITH. What does the tyrant?
  CAITHNESS. Great Dunsinane he strongly fortifies.
    Some say he's mad; others, that lesser hate him,
    Do call it valiant fury; but, for certain,
    He cannot buckle his distemper'd cause
    Within the belt of rule.
  ANGUS. Now does he feel
    His secret murthers sticking on his hands,
    Now minutely revolts upbraid his faith-breach;
    Those he commands move only in command,
    Nothing in love. Now does he feel his title
    Hang loose about him, like a giant's robe
    Upon a dwarfish thief.
  MENTEITH. Who then shall blame
    His pester'd senses to recoil and start,
    When all that is within him does condemn
    Itself for being there?
  CAITHNESS. Well, march we on
    To give obedience where 'tis truly owed.
    Meet we the medicine of the sickly weal,
    And with him pour we, in our country's purge,
    Each drop of us.
  LENNOX. Or so much as it needs
    To dew the sovereign flower and drown the weeds.
    Make we our march towards Birnam.           Exeunt marching.




SCENE III.
Dunsinane. A room in the castle.

Enter Macbeth, Doctor, and Attendants.

  MACBETH. Bring me no more reports; let them fly all!
    Till Birnam Wood remove to Dunsinane
    I cannot taint with fear. What's the boy Malcolm?
    Was he not born of woman? The spirits that know
    All mortal consequences have pronounced me thus:
    "Fear not, Macbeth; no man that's born of woman
    Shall e'er have power upon thee." Then fly, false Thanes,
    And mingle with the English epicures!
    The mind I sway by and the heart I bear
    Shall never sag with doubt nor shake with fear.

                       Enter a Servant.

    The devil damn thee black, thou cream-faced loon!
    Where got'st thou that goose look?
  SERVANT. There is ten thousand-
  MACBETH. Geese, villain?
  SERVANT. Soldiers, sir.
  MACBETH. Go prick thy face and over-red thy fear,
    Thou lily-liver'd boy. What soldiers, patch?
    Death of thy soul! Those linen cheeks of thine
    Are counselors to fear. What soldiers, whey-face?
  SERVANT. The English force, so please you.
  MACBETH. Take thy face hence.                    Exit Servant.
    Seyton-I am sick at heart,
    When I behold- Seyton, I say!- This push
    Will cheer me ever or disseat me now.
    I have lived long enough. My way of life
    Is fall'n into the sear, the yellow leaf,
    And that which should accompany old age,
    As honor, love, obedience, troops of friends,
    I must not look to have; but in their stead,
    Curses, not loud but deep, mouth-honor, breath,
    Which the poor heart would fain deny and dare not.
    Seyton!

                       Enter Seyton.

  SEYTON. What's your gracious pleasure?
  MACBETH. What news more?
  SEYTON. All is confirm'd, my lord, which was reported.
  MACBETH. I'll fight, 'til from my bones my flesh be hack'd.
    Give me my armor.
  SEYTON. 'Tis not needed yet.
  MACBETH. I'll put it on.
    Send out more horses, skirr the country round,
    Hang those that talk of fear. Give me mine armor.
    How does your patient, doctor?
  DOCTOR. Not so sick, my lord,
    As she is troubled with thick-coming fancies,
    That keep her from her rest.
  MACBETH. Cure her of that.
    Canst thou not minister to a mind diseased,
    Pluck from the memory a rooted sorrow,
    Raze out the written troubles of the brain,
    And with some sweet oblivious antidote
    Cleanse the stuff'd bosom of that perilous stuff
    Which weighs upon the heart?
  DOCTOR. Therein the patient
    Must minister to himself.
  MACBETH. Throw physic to the dogs, I'll none of it.
    Come, put mine armor on; give me my staff.
    Seyton, send out. Doctor, the Thanes fly from me.
    Come, sir, dispatch. If thou couldst, doctor, cast
    The water of my land, find her disease
    And purge it to a sound and pristine health,
    I would applaud thee to the very echo,
    That should applaud again. Pull't off, I say.
    What rhubarb, cyme, or what purgative drug
    Would scour these English hence? Hearst thou of them?
  DOCTOR. Ay, my good lord, your royal preparation
    Makes us hear something.
  MACBETH. Bring it after me.
    I will not be afraid of death and bane
    Till Birnam Forest come to Dunsinane.
  DOCTOR. [Aside.] Were I from Dunsinane away and clear,
    Profit again should hardly draw me here.             Exeunt.




SCENE IV.
Country near Birnam Wood. Drum and colors.

Enter Malcolm, old Seward and his Son, Macduff, Menteith, Caithness,
Angus, Lennox, Ross, and Soldiers, marching.

  MALCOLM. Cousins, I hope the days are near at hand
    That chambers will be safe.
  MENTEITH. We doubt it nothing.
  SIWARD. What wood is this before us?
  MENTEITH. The Wood of Birnam.
  MALCOLM. Let every soldier hew him down a bough,
    And bear't before him; thereby shall we shadow
    The numbers of our host, and make discovery
    Err in report of us.
  SOLDIERS. It shall be done.
  SIWARD. We learn no other but the confident tyrant
    Keeps still in Dunsinane and will endure
    Our setting down before't.
  MALCOLM. 'Tis his main hope;
    For where there is advantage to be given,
    Both more and less have given him the revolt,
    And none serve with him but constrained things
    Whose hearts are absent too.
  MACDUFF. Let our just censures
    Attend the true event, and put we on
    Industrious soldiership.
  SIWARD. The time approaches
    That will with due decision make us know
    What we shall say we have and what we owe.
    Thoughts speculative their unsure hopes relate,
    But certain issue strokes must arbitrate.
    Towards which advance the war.
                                                Exeunt Marching.




SCENE V.
Dunsinane. Within the castle.

Enter Macbeth, Seyton, and Soldiers, with drum and colors.

  MACBETH. Hang out our banners on the outward walls;
    The cry is still, "They come!" Our castle's strength
    Will laugh a siege to scorn. Here let them lie
    Till famine and the ague eat them up.
    Were they not forced with those that should be ours,
    We might have met them dareful, beard to beard,
    And beat them backward home.
                                          A cry of women within.
    What is that noise?
  SEYTON. It is the cry of women, my good lord.            Exit.
  MACBETH. I have almost forgot the taste of fears:
    The time has been, my senses would have cool'd
    To hear a night-shriek, and my fell of hair
    Would at a dismal treatise rouse and stir
    As life were in't. I have supp'd full with horrors;
    Direness, familiar to my slaughterous thoughts,
    Cannot once start me.

                  Re-enter Seyton.
     Wherefore was that cry?
  SEYTON. The Queen, my lord, is dead.
  MACBETH. She should have died hereafter;
    There would have been a time for such a word.
    Tomorrow, and tomorrow, and tomorrow
    Creeps in this petty pace from day to day
    To the last syllable of recorded time;
    And all our yesterdays have lighted fools
    The way to dusty death. Out, out, brief candle!
    Life's but a walking shadow, a poor player
    That struts and frets his hour upon the stage
    And then is heard no more. It is a tale
    Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury,
    Signifying nothing.

                 Enter a Messenger.

    Thou comest to use thy tongue; thy story quickly.
  MESSENGER. Gracious my lord,
    I should report that which I say I saw,
    But know not how to do it.
  MACBETH. Well, say, sir.
  MESSENGER. As I did stand my watch upon the hill,
    I look'd toward Birnam, and anon, methought,
    The Wood began to move.
  MACBETH. Liar and slave!
  MESSENGER. Let me endure your wrath, if't be not so.
    Within this three mile may you see it coming;
    I say, a moving grove.
  MACBETH. If thou speak'st false,
    Upon the next tree shalt thou hang alive,
    Till famine cling thee; if thy speech be sooth,
    I care not if thou dost for me as much.
    I pull in resolution and begin
    To doubt the equivocation of the fiend
    That lies like truth. "Fear not, till Birnam Wood
    Do come to Dunsinane," and now a wood
    Comes toward Dunsinane. Arm, arm, and out!
    If this which he avouches does appear,
    There is nor flying hence nor tarrying here.
    I 'gin to be aweary of the sun
    And wish the estate o' the world were now undone.
    Ring the alarum bell! Blow, wind! Come, wrack!
    At least we'll die with harness on our back.         Exeunt.




SCENE VI.
Dunsinane.  Before the castle.

Enter Malcolm, old Siward, Macduff, and their Army, with boughs.
Drum and colors.

  MALCOLM. Now near enough; your leavy screens throw down,
    And show like those you are. You, worthy uncle,
    Shall with my cousin, your right noble son,
    Lead our first battle. Worthy Macduff and we
    Shall take upon 's what else remains to do,
    According to our order.
  SIWARD. Fare you well.
    Do we but find the tyrant's power tonight,
    Let us be beaten if we cannot fight.
  MACDUFF. Make all our trumpets speak, give them all breath,
    Those clamorous harbingers of blood and death.
                                                         Exeunt.




SCENE VII.
Dunsinane.  Before the castle.  Alarums.

Enter Macbeth.

  MACBETH. They have tied me to a stake; I cannot fly,
    But bear-like I must fight the course. What's he
    That was not born of woman? Such a one
    Am I to fear, or none.

                     Enter young Siward.

  YOUNG SIWARD. What is thy name?
  MACBETH. Thou'lt be afraid to hear it.
  YOUNG SIWARD. No, though thou call'st thyself a hotter name
    Than any is in hell.
  MACBETH. My name's Macbeth.
  YOUNG SIWARD. The devil himself could not pronounce a title
    More hateful to mine ear.
  MACBETH. No, nor more fearful.
  YOUNG SIWARD O Thou liest, abhorred tyrant; with my sword
    I'll prove the lie thou speak'st.
                          They fight, and young Seward is slain.
  MACBETH. Thou wast born of woman.
    But swords I smile at, weapons laugh to scorn,
    Brandish'd by man that's of a woman born.              Exit.

                Alarums. Enter Macduff.

  MACDUFF. That way the noise is. Tyrant, show thy face!
    If thou best slain and with no stroke of mine,
    My wife and children's ghosts will haunt me still.
    I cannot strike at wretched kerns, whose arms
    Are hired to bear their staves. Either thou, Macbeth,
    Or else my sword, with an unbatter'd edge,
    I sheathe again undeeded. There thou shouldst be;
    By this great clatter, one of greatest note
    Seems bruited. Let me find him, Fortune!
    And more I beg not.                           Exit. Alarums.

                Enter Malcolm and old Siward.

  SIWARD. This way, my lord; the castle's gently render'd.
    The tyrant's people on both sides do fight,
    The noble Thanes do bravely in the war,
    The day almost itself professes yours,
    And little is to do.
  MALCOLM. We have met with foes
    That strike beside us.
  SIWARD. Enter, sir, the castle.
                                                 Exeunt. Alarum.




SCENE VIII.
Another part of the field.

Enter Macbeth.

  MACBETH. Why should I play the Roman fool and die
    On mine own sword? Whiles I see lives, the gashes
    Do better upon them.

                      Enter Macduff.

  MACDUFF. Turn, hell hound, turn!
  MACBETH. Of all men else I have avoided thee.
    But get thee back, my soul is too much charged
    With blood of thine already.
  MACDUFF. I have no words.
    My voice is in my sword, thou bloodier villain
    Than terms can give thee out!                    They fight.
  MACBETH. Thou losest labor.
    As easy mayst thou the intrenchant air
    With thy keen sword impress as make me bleed.
    Let fall thy blade on vulnerable crests;
    I bear a charmed life, which must not yield
    To one of woman born.
  MACDUFF. Despair thy charm,
    And let the angel whom thou still hast served
    Tell thee, Macduff was from his mother's womb
    Untimely ripp'd.
  MACBETH. Accursed be that tongue that tells me so,
    For it hath cow'd my better part of man!
    And be these juggling fiends no more believed
    That patter with us in a double sense,
    That keep the word of promise to our ear
    And break it to our hope. I'll not fight with thee.
  MACDUFF. Then yield thee, coward,
    And live to be the show and gaze o' the time.
    We'll have thee, as our rarer monsters are,
    Painted upon a pole, and underwrit,
    "Here may you see the tyrant."
  MACBETH. I will not yield,
    To kiss the ground before young Malcolm's feet,
    And to be baited with the rabble's curse.
    Though Birnam Wood be come to Dunsinane,
    And thou opposed, being of no woman born,
    Yet I will try the last. Before my body
    I throw my warlike shield! Lay on, Macduff,
    And damn'd be him that first cries, "Hold, enough!"
                                       Exeunt fighting. Alarums.




SCENE IX.

Retreat. Flourish. Enter, with drum and colors, Malcolm, old Siward, Ross,
the other Thanes, and Soldiers.

  MALCOLM. I would the friends we miss were safe arrived.
  SIWARD. Some must go off, and yet, by these I see,
    So great a day as this is cheaply bought.
  MALCOLM. Macduff is missing, and your noble son.
  ROSS. Your son, my lord, has paid a soldier's debt.
    He only lived but till he was a man,
    The which no sooner had his prowess confirm'd
    In the unshrinking station where he fought,
    But like a man he died.
  SIWARD. Then he is dead?
  ROSS. Ay, and brought off the field. Your cause of sorrow
    Must not be measured by his worth, for then
    It hath no end.
  SIWARD. Had he his hurts before?
  ROSS. Ay, on the front.
  SIWARD. Why then, God's soldier be he!
    Had I as many sons as I have hairs,
    I would not wish them to a fairer death.
    And so his knell is knoll'd.
  MALCOLM. He's worth more sorrow,
    And that I'll spend for him.
  SIWARD. He's worth no more:
    They say he parted well and paid his score,
    And so God be with him! Here comes newer comfort.

             Re-enter Macduff, with Macbeth's head.

  MACDUFF. Hail, King, for so thou art. Behold where stands
    The usurper's cursed head. The time is free.
    I see thee compass'd with thy kingdom's pearl
    That speak my salutation in their minds,
    Whose voices I desire aloud with mine-
    Hail, King of Scotland!
  ALL. Hail, King of Scotland!                         Flourish.
  MALCOLM. We shall not spend a large expense of time
    Before we reckon with your several loves
    And make us even with you. My Thanes and kinsmen,
    Henceforth be Earls, the first that ever Scotland
    In such an honor named. What's more to do,
    Which would be planted newly with the time,
    As calling home our exiled friends abroad
    That fled the snares of watchful tyranny,
    Producing forth the cruel ministers
    Of this dead butcher and his fiend-like queen,
    Who, as 'tis thought, by self and violent hands
    Took off her life; this, and what needful else
    That calls upon us, by the grace of Grace
    We will perform in measure, time, and place.
    So thanks to all at once and to each one,
    Whom we invite to see us crown'd at Scone.
                                               Flourish. Exeunt.
                 -THE END-



<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>





1605


MEASURE FOR MEASURE

by William Shakespeare



DRAMATIS PERSONAE

  VINCENTIO, the Duke
  ANGELO, the Deputy
  ESCALUS, an ancient Lord
  CLAUDIO, a young gentleman
  LUCIO, a fantastic
  Two other like Gentlemen
  VARRIUS, a gentleman, servant to the Duke
  PROVOST
  THOMAS, friar
  PETER, friar
  A JUSTICE
  ELBOW, a simple constable
  FROTH, a foolish gentleman
  POMPEY, a clown and servant to Mistress Overdone
  ABHORSON, an executioner
  BARNARDINE, a dissolute prisoner

  ISABELLA, sister to Claudio
  MARIANA, betrothed to Angelo
  JULIET, beloved of Claudio
  FRANCISCA, a nun
  MISTRESS OVERDONE, a bawd

  Lords, Officers, Citizens, Boy, and Attendants




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



SCENE:
Vienna


ACT I. SCENE I.
The DUKE'S palace

Enter DUKE, ESCALUS, LORDS, and ATTENDANTS

  DUKE. Escalus!
  ESCALUS. My lord.
  DUKE. Of government the properties to unfold
    Would seem in me t' affect speech and discourse,
    Since I am put to know that your own science
    Exceeds, in that, the lists of all advice
    My strength can give you; then no more remains
    But that to your sufficiency- as your worth is able-
    And let them work. The nature of our people,
    Our city's institutions, and the terms
    For common justice, y'are as pregnant in
    As art and practice hath enriched any
    That we remember. There is our commission,
    From which we would not have you warp. Call hither,
    I say, bid come before us, Angelo.         Exit an ATTENDANT
    What figure of us think you he will bear?
    For you must know we have with special soul
    Elected him our absence to supply;
    Lent him our terror, dress'd him with our love,
    And given his deputation all the organs
    Of our own power. What think you of it?
  ESCALUS. If any in Vienna be of worth
    To undergo such ample grace and honour,
    It is Lord Angelo.

                          Enter ANGELO

  DUKE. Look where he comes.
  ANGELO. Always obedient to your Grace's will,
    I come to know your pleasure.
  DUKE. Angelo,
    There is a kind of character in thy life
    That to th' observer doth thy history
    Fully unfold. Thyself and thy belongings
    Are not thine own so proper as to waste
    Thyself upon thy virtues, they on thee.
    Heaven doth with us as we with torches do,
    Not light them for themselves; for if our virtues
    Did not go forth of us, 'twere all alike
    As if we had them not. Spirits are not finely touch'd
    But to fine issues; nor Nature never lends
    The smallest scruple of her excellence
    But, like a thrifty goddess, she determines
    Herself the glory of a creditor,
    Both thanks and use. But I do bend my speech
    To one that can my part in him advertise.
    Hold, therefore, Angelo-
    In our remove be thou at full ourself;
    Mortality and mercy in Vienna
    Live in thy tongue and heart. Old Escalus,
    Though first in question, is thy secondary.
    Take thy commission.
  ANGELO. Now, good my lord,
    Let there be some more test made of my metal,
    Before so noble and so great a figure
    Be stamp'd upon it.
  DUKE. No more evasion!
    We have with a leaven'd and prepared choice
    Proceeded to you; therefore take your honours.
    Our haste from hence is of so quick condition
    That it prefers itself, and leaves unquestion'd
    Matters of needful value. We shall write to you,
    As time and our concernings shall importune,
    How it goes with us, and do look to know
    What doth befall you here. So, fare you well.
    To th' hopeful execution do I leave you
    Of your commissions.
  ANGELO. Yet give leave, my lord,
    That we may bring you something on the way.
  DUKE. My haste may not admit it;
    Nor need you, on mine honour, have to do
    With any scruple: your scope is as mine own,
    So to enforce or qualify the laws
    As to your soul seems good. Give me your hand;
    I'll privily away. I love the people,
    But do not like to stage me to their eyes;
    Though it do well, I do not relish well
    Their loud applause and Aves vehement;
    Nor do I think the man of safe discretion
    That does affect it. Once more, fare you well.
  ANGELO. The heavens give safety to your purposes!
  ESCALUS. Lead forth and bring you back in happiness!
  DUKE. I thank you. Fare you well.                         Exit
  ESCALUS. I shall desire you, sir, to give me leave
    To have free speech with you; and it concerns me
    To look into the bottom of my place:
    A pow'r I have, but of what strength and nature
    I am not yet instructed.
  ANGELO. 'Tis so with me. Let us withdraw together,
    And we may soon our satisfaction have
    Touching that point.
  ESCALUS. I'll wait upon your honour.                    Exeunt




SCENE II.
A street

Enter Lucio and two other GENTLEMEN

  LUCIO. If the Duke, with the other dukes, come not to composition
    with the King of Hungary, why then all the dukes fall upon the
    King.
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. Heaven grant us its peace, but not the King of
    Hungary's!
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. Amen.
  LUCIO. Thou conclud'st like the sanctimonious pirate that went to
    sea with the Ten Commandments, but scrap'd one out of the table.
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. 'Thou shalt not steal'?
  LUCIO. Ay, that he raz'd.
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. Why, 'twas a commandment to command the captain
    and all the rest from their functions: they put forth to steal.
    There's not a soldier of us all that, in the thanksgiving before
    meat, do relish the petition well that prays for peace.
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. I never heard any soldier dislike it.
  LUCIO. I believe thee; for I think thou never wast where grace was
    said.
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. No? A dozen times at least.
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. What, in metre?
  LUCIO. In any proportion or in any language.
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. I think, or in any religion.
  LUCIO. Ay, why not? Grace is grace, despite of all controversy; as,
    for example, thou thyself art a wicked villain, despite of all
    grace.
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. Well, there went but a pair of shears between us.
  LUCIO. I grant; as there may between the lists and the velvet.
    Thou art the list.
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. And thou the velvet; thou art good velvet; thou'rt
    a three-pil'd piece, I warrant thee. I had as lief be a list of
    an English kersey as be pil'd, as thou art pil'd, for a French
    velvet. Do I speak feelingly now?
  LUCIO. I think thou dost; and, indeed, with most painful feeling of
    thy speech. I will, out of thine own confession, learn to begin
    thy health; but, whilst I live, forget to drink after thee.
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. I think I have done myself wrong, have I not?
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. Yes, that thou hast, whether thou art tainted or
    free.

                        Enter MISTRESS OVERDONE

  LUCIO. Behold, behold, where Madam Mitigation comes! I have
    purchas'd as many diseases under her roof as come to-
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. To what, I pray?
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. Judge.
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. To three thousand dolours a year.
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. Ay, and more.
  LUCIO. A French crown more.
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. Thou art always figuring diseases in me, but thou
    art full of error; I am sound.
  LUCIO. Nay, not, as one would say, healthy; but so sound as things
    that are hollow: thy bones are hollow; impiety has made a feast
    of thee.
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. How now! which of your hips has the most profound
    sciatica?
  MRS. OVERDONE. Well, well! there's one yonder arrested and carried
    to prison was worth five thousand of you all.
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. Who's that, I pray thee?
  MRS. OVERDONE. Marry, sir, that's Claudio, Signior Claudio.
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. Claudio to prison? 'Tis not so.
  MRS. OVERDONE. Nay, but I know 'tis so: I saw him arrested; saw him
    carried away; and, which is more, within these three days his
    head to be chopp'd off.
  LUCIO. But, after all this fooling, I would not have it so. Art
    thou sure of this?
  MRS. OVERDONE. I am too sure of it; and it is for getting Madam
    Julietta with child.
  LUCIO. Believe me, this may be; he promis'd to meet me two hours
    since, and he was ever precise in promise-keeping.
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. Besides, you know, it draws something near to the
    speech we had to such a purpose.
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. But most of all agreeing with the proclamation.
  LUCIO. Away; let's go learn the truth of it.
                                      Exeunt Lucio and GENTLEMEN
  MRS. OVERDONE. Thus, what with the war, what with the sweat, what
    with the gallows, and what with poverty, I am custom-shrunk.

                               Enter POMPEY

    How now! what's the news with you?
  POMPEY. Yonder man is carried to prison.
  MRS. OVERDONE. Well, what has he done?
  POMPEY. A woman.
  MRS. OVERDONE. But what's his offence?
  POMPEY. Groping for trouts in a peculiar river.
  MRS. OVERDONE. What! is there a maid with child by him?
  POMPEY. No; but there's a woman with maid by him. You have not
   heard of the proclamation, have you?
  MRS. OVERDONE. What proclamation, man?
  POMPEY. All houses in the suburbs of Vienna must be pluck'd down.
  MRS. OVERDONE. And what shall become of those in the city?
  POMPEY. They shall stand for seed; they had gone down too, but that
    a wise burgher put in for them.
  MRS. OVERDONE. But shall all our houses of resort in the suburbs be
    pull'd down?
  POMPEY. To the ground, mistress.
  MRS. OVERDONE. Why, here's a change indeed in the commonwealth!
    What shall become of me?
  POMPEY. Come, fear not you: good counsellors lack no clients.
    Though you change your place you need not change your trade; I'll
    be your tapster still. Courage, there will be pity taken on you;
    you that have worn your eyes almost out in the service, you will
    be considered.
  MRS. OVERDONE. What's to do here, Thomas Tapster? Let's withdraw.
  POMPEY. Here comes Signior Claudio, led by the provost to prison;
    and there's Madam Juliet.                             Exeunt

            Enter PROVOST, CLAUDIO, JULIET, and OFFICERS;
                            LUCIO following

  CLAUDIO. Fellow, why dost thou show me thus to th' world?
    Bear me to prison, where I am committed.
  PROVOST. I do it not in evil disposition,
    But from Lord Angelo by special charge.
  CLAUDIO. Thus can the demigod Authority
    Make us pay down for our offence by weight
    The words of heaven: on whom it will, it will;
    On whom it will not, so; yet still 'tis just.
  LUCIO. Why, how now, Claudio, whence comes this restraint?
  CLAUDIO. From too much liberty, my Lucio, liberty;
    As surfeit is the father of much fast,
    So every scope by the immoderate use
    Turns to restraint. Our natures do pursue,
    Like rats that ravin down their proper bane,
    A thirsty evil; and when we drink we die.
  LUCIO. If I could speak so wisely under an arrest, I would send for
    certain of my creditors; and yet, to say the truth, I had as lief
    have the foppery of freedom as the morality of imprisonment.
    What's thy offence, Claudio?
  CLAUDIO. What but to speak of would offend again.
  LUCIO. What, is't murder?
  CLAUDIO. No.
  LUCIO. Lechery?
  CLAUDIO. Call it so.
  PROVOST. Away, sir; you must go.
  CLAUDIO. One word, good friend. Lucio, a word with you.
  LUCIO. A hundred, if they'll do you any good. Is lechery so look'd
    after?
  CLAUDIO. Thus stands it with me: upon a true contract
    I got possession of Julietta's bed.
    You know the lady; she is fast my wife,
    Save that we do the denunciation lack
    Of outward order; this we came not to,
    Only for propagation of a dow'r
    Remaining in the coffer of her friends.
    From whom we thought it meet to hide our love
    Till time had made them for us. But it chances
    The stealth of our most mutual entertainment,
    With character too gross, is writ on Juliet.
  LUCIO. With child, perhaps?
  CLAUDIO. Unhappily, even so.
    And the new deputy now for the Duke-
    Whether it be the fault and glimpse of newness,
    Or whether that the body public be
    A horse whereon the governor doth ride,
    Who, newly in the seat, that it may know
    He can command, lets it straight feel the spur;
    Whether the tyranny be in his place,
    Or in his eminence that fills it up,
    I stagger in. But this new governor
    Awakes me all the enrolled penalties
    Which have, like unscour'd armour, hung by th' wall
    So long that nineteen zodiacs have gone round
    And none of them been worn; and, for a name,
    Now puts the drowsy and neglected act
    Freshly on me. 'Tis surely for a name.
  LUCIO. I warrant it is; and thy head stands so tickle on thy
    shoulders that a milkmaid, if she be in love, may sigh it off.
    Send after the Duke, and appeal to him.
  CLAUDIO. I have done so, but he's not to be found.
    I prithee, Lucio, do me this kind service:
    This day my sister should the cloister enter,
    And there receive her approbation;
    Acquaint her with the danger of my state;
    Implore her, in my voice, that she make friends
    To the strict deputy; bid herself assay him.
    I have great hope in that; for in her youth
    There is a prone and speechless dialect
    Such as move men; beside, she hath prosperous art
    When she will play with reason and discourse,
    And well she can persuade.
  LUCIO. I pray she may; as well for the encouragement of the like,
    which else would stand under grievous imposition, as for the
    enjoying of thy life, who I would be sorry should be thus
    foolishly lost at a game of tick-tack. I'll to her.
  CLAUDIO. I thank you, good friend Lucio.
  LUCIO. Within two hours.
  CLAUDIO. Come, officer, away.                           Exeunt




SCENE III.
A monastery

Enter DUKE and FRIAR THOMAS

  DUKE. No, holy father; throw away that thought;
    Believe not that the dribbling dart of love
    Can pierce a complete bosom. Why I desire thee
    To give me secret harbour hath a purpose
    More grave and wrinkled than the aims and ends
    Of burning youth.
  FRIAR. May your Grace speak of it?
  DUKE. My holy sir, none better knows than you
    How I have ever lov'd the life removed,
    And held in idle price to haunt assemblies
    Where youth, and cost, a witless bravery keeps.
    I have deliver'd to Lord Angelo,
    A man of stricture and firm abstinence,
    My absolute power and place here in Vienna,
    And he supposes me travell'd to Poland;
    For so I have strew'd it in the common ear,
    And so it is received. Now, pious sir,
    You will demand of me why I do this.
  FRIAR. Gladly, my lord.
  DUKE. We have strict statutes and most biting laws,
    The needful bits and curbs to headstrong steeds,
    Which for this fourteen years we have let slip;
    Even like an o'ergrown lion in a cave,
    That goes not out to prey. Now, as fond fathers,
    Having bound up the threat'ning twigs of birch,
    Only to stick it in their children's sight
    For terror, not to use, in time the rod
    Becomes more mock'd than fear'd; so our decrees,
    Dead to infliction, to themselves are dead;
    And liberty plucks justice by the nose;
    The baby beats the nurse, and quite athwart
    Goes all decorum.
  FRIAR. It rested in your Grace
    To unloose this tied-up justice when you pleas'd;
    And it in you more dreadful would have seem'd
    Than in Lord Angelo.
  DUKE. I do fear, too dreadful.
    Sith 'twas my fault to give the people scope,
    'Twould be my tyranny to strike and gall them
    For what I bid them do; for we bid this be done,
    When evil deeds have their permissive pass
    And not the punishment. Therefore, indeed, my father,
    I have on Angelo impos'd the office;
    Who may, in th' ambush of my name, strike home,
    And yet my nature never in the fight
    To do in slander. And to behold his sway,
    I will, as 'twere a brother of your order,
    Visit both prince and people. Therefore, I prithee,
    Supply me with the habit, and instruct me
    How I may formally in person bear me
    Like a true friar. Moe reasons for this action
    At our more leisure shall I render you.
    Only, this one: Lord Angelo is precise;
    Stands at a guard with envy; scarce confesses
    That his blood flows, or that his appetite
    Is more to bread than stone. Hence shall we see,
    If power change purpose, what our seemers be.         Exeunt




SCENE IV.
A nunnery

Enter ISABELLA and FRANCISCA

  ISABELLA. And have you nuns no farther privileges?
  FRANCISCA. Are not these large enough?
  ISABELLA. Yes, truly; I speak not as desiring more,
    But rather wishing a more strict restraint
    Upon the sisterhood, the votarists of Saint Clare.
  LUCIO. [ Within] Ho! Peace be in this place!
  ISABELLA. Who's that which calls?
  FRANCISCA. It is a man's voice. Gentle Isabella,
    Turn you the key, and know his business of him:
    You may, I may not; you are yet unsworn;
    When you have vow'd, you must not speak with men
    But in the presence of the prioress;
    Then, if you speak, you must not show your face,
    Or, if you show your face, you must not speak.
    He calls again; I pray you answer him.        Exit FRANCISCA
  ISABELLA. Peace and prosperity! Who is't that calls?

                           Enter LUCIO

  LUCIO. Hail, virgin, if you be, as those cheek-roses
    Proclaim you are no less. Can you so stead me
    As bring me to the sight of Isabella,
    A novice of this place, and the fair sister
    To her unhappy brother Claudio?
  ISABELLA. Why her 'unhappy brother'? Let me ask
    The rather, for I now must make you know
    I am that Isabella, and his sister.
  LUCIO. Gentle and fair, your brother kindly greets you.
    Not to be weary with you, he's in prison.
  ISABELLA. Woe me! For what?
  LUCIO. For that which, if myself might be his judge,
    He should receive his punishment in thanks:
    He hath got his friend with child.
  ISABELLA. Sir, make me not your story.
  LUCIO. It is true.
    I would not- though 'tis my familiar sin
    With maids to seem the lapwing, and to jest,
    Tongue far from heart- play with all virgins so:
    I hold you as a thing enskied and sainted,
    By your renouncement an immortal spirit,
    And to be talk'd with in sincerity,
    As with a saint.
  ISABELLA. You do blaspheme the good in mocking me.
  LUCIO. Do not believe it. Fewness and truth, 'tis thus:
    Your brother and his lover have embrac'd.
    As those that feed grow full, as blossoming time
    That from the seedness the bare fallow brings
    To teeming foison, even so her plenteous womb
    Expresseth his full tilth and husbandry.
  ISABELLA. Some one with child by him? My cousin Juliet?
  LUCIO. Is she your cousin?
  ISABELLA. Adoptedly, as school-maids change their names
    By vain though apt affection.
  LUCIO. She it is.
  ISABELLA. O, let him marry her!
  LUCIO. This is the point.
    The Duke is very strangely gone from hence;
    Bore many gentlemen, myself being one,
    In hand, and hope of action; but we do learn,
    By those that know the very nerves of state,
    His givings-out were of an infinite distance
    From his true-meant design. Upon his place,
    And with full line of his authority,
    Governs Lord Angelo, a man whose blood
    Is very snow-broth, one who never feels
    The wanton stings and motions of the sense,
    But doth rebate and blunt his natural edge
    With profits of the mind, study and fast.
    He- to give fear to use and liberty,
    Which have for long run by the hideous law,
    As mice by lions- hath pick'd out an act
    Under whose heavy sense your brother's life
    Falls into forfeit; he arrests him on it,
    And follows close the rigour of the statute
    To make him an example. All hope is gone,
    Unless you have the grace by your fair prayer
    To soften Angelo. And that's my pith of business
    'Twixt you and your poor brother.
  ISABELLA. Doth he so seek his life?
  LUCIO. Has censur'd him
    Already, and, as I hear, the Provost hath
    A warrant for his execution.
  ISABELLA. Alas! what poor ability's in me
    To do him good?
  LUCIO. Assay the pow'r you have.
  ISABELLA. My power, alas, I doubt!
  LUCIO. Our doubts are traitors,
    And make us lose the good we oft might win
    By fearing to attempt. Go to Lord Angelo,
    And let him learn to know, when maidens sue,
    Men give like gods; but when they weep and kneel,
    All their petitions are as freely theirs
    As they themselves would owe them.
  ISABELLA. I'll see what I can do.
  LUCIO. But speedily.
  ISABELLA. I will about it straight;
    No longer staying but to give the Mother
    Notice of my affair. I humbly thank you.
    Commend me to my brother; soon at night
    I'll send him certain word of my success.
  LUCIO. I take my leave of you.
  ISABELLA. Good sir, adieu.                              Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT II. Scene I.
A hall in ANGELO'S house

Enter ANGELO, ESCALUS, a JUSTICE, PROVOST, OFFICERS, and other ATTENDANTS

  ANGELO. We must not make a scarecrow of the law,
    Setting it up to fear the birds of prey,
    And let it keep one shape till custom make it
    Their perch, and not their terror.
  ESCALUS. Ay, but yet
    Let us be keen, and rather cut a little
    Than fall and bruise to death. Alas! this gentleman,
    Whom I would save, had a most noble father.
    Let but your honour know,
    Whom I believe to be most strait in virtue,
    That, in the working of your own affections,
    Had time coher'd with place, or place with wishing,
    Or that the resolute acting of our blood
    Could have attain'd th' effect of your own purpose
    Whether you had not sometime in your life
    Err'd in this point which now you censure him,
    And pull'd the law upon you.
  ANGELO. 'Tis one thing to be tempted, Escalus,
    Another thing to fall. I not deny
    The jury, passing on the prisoner's life,
    May in the sworn twelve have a thief or two
    Guiltier than him they try. What's open made to justice,
    That justice seizes. What knows the laws
    That thieves do pass on thieves? 'Tis very pregnant,
    The jewel that we find, we stoop and take't,
    Because we see it; but what we do not see
    We tread upon, and never think of it.
    You may not so extenuate his offence
    For I have had such faults; but rather tell me,
    When I, that censure him, do so offend,
    Let mine own judgment pattern out my death,
    And nothing come in partial. Sir, he must die.
  ESCALUS. Be it as your wisdom will.
  ANGELO. Where is the Provost?
  PROVOST. Here, if it like your honour.
  ANGELO. See that Claudio
    Be executed by nine to-morrow morning;
    Bring him his confessor; let him be prepar'd;
    For that's the utmost of his pilgrimage.        Exit PROVOST
  ESCALUS. [Aside] Well, heaven forgive him! and forgive us all!
    Some rise by sin, and some by virtue fall;
    Some run from breaks of ice, and answer none,
    And some condemned for a fault alone.

         Enter ELBOW and OFFICERS with FROTH and POMPEY

  ELBOW. Come, bring them away; if these be good people in a
    commonweal that do nothing but use their abuses in common houses,
    I know no law; bring them away.
  ANGELO. How now, sir! What's your name, and what's the matter?
  ELBOW. If it please your honour, I am the poor Duke's constable,
    and my name is Elbow; I do lean upon justice, sir, and do bring
    in here before your good honour two notorious benefactors.
  ANGELO. Benefactors! Well- what benefactors are they? Are they not
    malefactors?
  ELBOW. If it please your honour, I know not well what they are; but
    precise villains they are, that I am sure of, and void of all
    profanation in the world that good Christians ought to have.
  ESCALUS. This comes off well; here's a wise officer.
  ANGELO. Go to; what quality are they of? Elbow is your name? Why
    dost thou not speak, Elbow?
  POMPEY. He cannot, sir; he's out at elbow.
  ANGELO. What are you, sir?
  ELBOW. He, sir? A tapster, sir; parcel-bawd; one that serves a bad
    woman; whose house, sir, was, as they say, pluck'd down in the
    suburbs; and now she professes a hot-house, which, I think, is a
    very ill house too.
  ESCALUS. How know you that?
  ELBOW. My Wife, sir, whom I detest before heaven and your honour-
  ESCALUS. How! thy wife!
  ELBOW. Ay, sir; whom I thank heaven, is an honest woman-
  ESCALUS. Dost thou detest her therefore?
  ELBOW. I say, sir, I will detest myself also, as well as she, that
    this house, if it be not a bawd's house, it is pity of her life,
    for it is a naughty house.
  ESCALUS. How dost thou know that, constable?
  ELBOW. Marry, sir, by my wife; who, if she had been a woman
    cardinally given, might have been accus'd in fornication,
    adultery, and all uncleanliness there.
  ESCALUS. By the woman's means?
  ELBOW. Ay, sir, by Mistress Overdone's means; but as she spit in
    his face, so she defied him.
  POMPEY. Sir, if it please your honour, this is not so.
  ELBOW. Prove it before these varlets here, thou honourable man,
    prove it.
  ESCALUS. Do you hear how he misplaces?
  POMPEY. Sir, she came in great with child; and longing, saving your
    honour's reverence, for stew'd prunes. Sir, we had but two in the
    house, which at that very distant time stood, as it were, in a
    fruit dish, a dish of some three pence; your honours have seen
    such dishes; they are not China dishes, but very good dishes.
  ESCALUS. Go to, go to; no matter for the dish, sir.
  POMPEY. No, indeed, sir, not of a pin; you are therein in the
    right; but to the point. As I say, this Mistress Elbow, being, as
    I say, with child, and being great-bellied, and longing, as I
    said, for prunes; and having but two in the dish, as I said,
    Master Froth here, this very man, having eaten the rest, as I
    said, and, as I say, paying for them very honestly; for, as you
    know, Master Froth, I could not give you three pence again-
  FROTH. No, indeed.
  POMPEY. Very well; you being then, if you be rememb'red, cracking
    the stones of the foresaid prunes-
  FROTH. Ay, so I did indeed.
  POMPEY. Why, very well; I telling you then, if you be rememb'red,
    that such a one and such a one were past cure of the thing you
    wot of, unless they kept very good diet, as I told you-
  FROTH. All this is true.
  POMPEY. Why, very well then-
  ESCALUS. Come, you are a tedious fool. To the purpose: what was
    done to Elbow's wife that he hath cause to complain of? Come me
    to what was done to her.
  POMPEY. Sir, your honour cannot come to that yet.
  ESCALUS. No, sir, nor I mean it not.
  POMPEY. Sir, but you shall come to it, by your honour's leave. And,
    I beseech you, look into Master Froth here, sir, a man of
    fourscore pound a year; whose father died at Hallowmas- was't not
    at Hallowmas, Master Froth?
  FROTH. All-hallond eve.
  POMPEY. Why, very well; I hope here be truths. He, sir, sitting, as
    I say, in a lower chair, sir; 'twas in the Bunch of Grapes,
    where, indeed, you have a delight to sit, have you not?
  FROTH. I have so; because it is an open room, and good for winter.
  POMPEY. Why, very well then; I hope here be truths.
  ANGELO. This will last out a night in Russia,
    When nights are longest there; I'll take my leave,
    And leave you to the hearing of the cause,
    Hoping you'll find good cause to whip them all.
  ESCALUS. I think no less. Good morrow to your lordship.
    [Exit ANGELO] Now, sir, come on; what was done to Elbow's wife,
    once more?
  POMPEY. Once?- sir. There was nothing done to her once.
  ELBOW. I beseech you, sir, ask him what this man did to my wife.
  POMPEY. I beseech your honour, ask me.
  ESCALUS. Well, sir, what did this gentleman to her?
  POMPEY. I beseech you, sir, look in this gentleman's face. Good
    Master Froth, look upon his honour; 'tis for a good purpose. Doth
    your honour mark his face?
  ESCALUS. Ay, sir, very well.
  POMPEY. Nay, I beseech you, mark it well.
  ESCALUS. Well, I do so.
  POMPEY. Doth your honour see any harm in his face?
  ESCALUS. Why, no.
  POMPEY. I'll be suppos'd upon a book his face is the worst thing
    about him. Good then; if his face be the worst thing about him,
    how could Master Froth do the constable's wife any harm? I would
    know that of your honour.
  ESCALUS. He's in the right, constable; what say you to it?
  ELBOW. First, an it like you, the house is a respected house; next,
    this is a respected fellow; and his mistress is a respected
    woman.
  POMPEY. By this hand, sir, his wife is a more respected person than
    any of us all.
  ELBOW. Varlet, thou liest; thou liest, wicket varlet; the time is
    yet to come that she was ever respected with man, woman, or
    child.
  POMPEY. Sir, she was respected with him before he married with her.
  ESCALUS. Which is the wiser here, Justice or Iniquity? Is this
    true?
  ELBOW. O thou caitiff! O thou varlet! O thou wicked Hannibal! I
    respected with her before I was married to her! If ever I was
    respected with her, or she with me, let not your worship think me
    the poor Duke's officer. Prove this, thou wicked Hannibal, or
    I'll have mine action of batt'ry on thee.
  ESCALUS. If he took you a box o' th' ear, you might have your
    action of slander too.
  ELBOW. Marry, I thank your good worship for it. What is't your
    worship's pleasure I shall do with this wicked caitiff?
  ESCALUS. Truly, officer, because he hath some offences in him that
    thou wouldst discover if thou couldst, let him continue in his
    courses till thou know'st what they are.
  ELBOW. Marry, I thank your worship for it. Thou seest, thou wicked
    varlet, now, what's come upon thee: thou art to continue now,
    thou varlet; thou art to continue.
  ESCALUS. Where were you born, friend?
  FROTH. Here in Vienna, sir.
  ESCALUS. Are you of fourscore pounds a year?
  FROTH. Yes, an't please you, sir.
  ESCALUS. So. What trade are you of, sir?
  POMPEY. A tapster, a poor widow's tapster.
  ESCALUS. Your mistress' name?
  POMPEY. Mistress Overdone.
  ESCALUS. Hath she had any more than one husband?
  POMPEY. Nine, sir; Overdone by the last.
  ESCALUS. Nine! Come hither to me, Master Froth. Master Froth, I
    would not have you acquainted with tapsters: they will draw you,
    Master Froth, and you will hang them. Get you gone, and let me
    hear no more of you.
  FROTH. I thank your worship. For mine own part, I never come into
    any room in a taphouse but I am drawn in.
  ESCALUS. Well, no more of it, Master Froth; farewell. [Exit FROTH]
    Come you hither to me, Master Tapster; what's your name, Master
    Tapster?
  POMPEY. Pompey.
  ESCALUS. What else?
  POMPEY. Bum, sir.
  ESCALUS. Troth, and your bum is the greatest thing about you; so
    that, in the beastliest sense, you are Pompey the Great. Pompey,
    you are partly a bawd, Pompey, howsoever you colour it in being a
    tapster. Are you not? Come, tell me true; it shall be the better
    for you.
  POMPEY. Truly, sir, I am a poor fellow that would live.
  ESCALUS. How would you live, Pompey- by being a bawd? What do you
    think of the trade, Pompey? Is it a lawful trade?
  POMPEY. If the law would allow it, sir.
  ESCALUS. But the law will not allow it, Pompey; nor it shall not be
    allowed in Vienna.
  POMPEY. Does your worship mean to geld and splay all the youth of
    the city?
  ESCALUS. No, Pompey.
  POMPEY. Truly, sir, in my poor opinion, they will to't then. If
    your worship will take order for the drabs and the knaves, you
    need not to fear the bawds.
  ESCALUS. There is pretty orders beginning, I can tell you: but it
    is but heading and hanging.
  POMPEY. If you head and hang all that offend that way but for ten
    year together, you'll be glad to give out a commission for more
    heads; if this law hold in Vienna ten year, I'll rent the fairest
    house in it, after threepence a bay. If you live to see this come
    to pass, say Pompey told you so.
  ESCALUS. Thank you, good Pompey; and, in requital of your prophecy,
    hark you: I advise you, let me not find you before me again upon
    any complaint whatsoever- no, not for dwelling where you do; if I
    do, Pompey, I shall beat you to your tent, and prove a shrewd
    Caesar to you; in plain dealing, Pompey, I shall have you whipt.
    So for this time, Pompey, fare you well.
  POMPEY. I thank your worship for your good counsel; [Aside] but I
    shall follow it as the flesh and fortune shall better determine.
    Whip me? No, no; let carman whip his jade;
    The valiant heart's not whipt out of his trade.         Exit
  ESCALUS. Come hither to me, Master Elbow; come hither, Master
    Constable. How long have you been in this place of constable?
  ELBOW. Seven year and a half, sir.
  ESCALUS. I thought, by the readiness in the office, you had
    continued in it some time. You say seven years together?
  ELBOW. And a half, sir.
  ESCALUS. Alas, it hath been great pains to you! They do you wrong
    to put you so oft upon't. Are there not men in your ward
    sufficient to serve it?
  ELBOW. Faith, sir, few of any wit in such matters; as they are
    chosen, they are glad to choose me for them; I do it for some
    piece of money, and go through with all.
  ESCALUS. Look you, bring me in the names of some six or seven, the
    most sufficient of your parish.
  ELBOW. To your worship's house, sir?
  ESCALUS. To my house. Fare you well.              [Exit ELBOW]
    What's o'clock, think you?
  JUSTICE. Eleven, sir.
  ESCALUS. I pray you home to dinner with me.
  JUSTICE. I humbly thank you.
  ESCALUS. It grieves me for the death of Claudio;
    But there's no remedy.
  JUSTICE. Lord Angelo is severe.
  ESCALUS. It is but needful:
    Mercy is not itself that oft looks so;
    Pardon is still the nurse of second woe.
    But yet, poor Claudio! There is no remedy.
    Come, sir.                                            Exeunt




SCENE II.
Another room in ANGELO'S house

Enter PROVOST and a SERVANT

  SERVANT. He's hearing of a cause; he will come straight.
    I'll tell him of you.
  PROVOST. Pray you do. [Exit SERVANT] I'll know
    His pleasure; may be he will relent. Alas,
    He hath but as offended in a dream!
    All sects, all ages, smack of this vice; and he
    To die for 't!

                            Enter ANGELO

  ANGELO. Now, what's the matter, Provost?
  PROVOST. Is it your will Claudio shall die to-morrow?
  ANGELO. Did not I tell thee yea? Hadst thou not order?
    Why dost thou ask again?
  PROVOST. Lest I might be too rash;
    Under your good correction, I have seen
    When, after execution, judgment hath
    Repented o'er his doom.
  ANGELO. Go to; let that be mine.
    Do you your office, or give up your place,
    And you shall well be spar'd.
  PROVOST. I crave your honour's pardon.
    What shall be done, sir, with the groaning Juliet?
    She's very near her hour.
  ANGELO. Dispose of her
    To some more fitter place, and that with speed.

                           Re-enter SERVANT

  SERVANT. Here is the sister of the man condemn'd
    Desires access to you.
  ANGELO. Hath he a sister?
  PROVOST. Ay, my good lord; a very virtuous maid,
    And to be shortly of a sisterhood,
    If not already.
  ANGELO. Well, let her be admitted.                Exit SERVANT
    See you the fornicatress be remov'd;
    Let her have needful but not lavish means;
    There shall be order for't.

                         Enter Lucio and ISABELLA

  PROVOST. [Going] Save your honour!
  ANGELO. Stay a little while. [To ISABELLA] Y'are welcome; what's
    your will?
  ISABELLA. I am a woeful suitor to your honour,
    Please but your honour hear me.
  ANGELO. Well; what's your suit?
  ISABELLA. There is a vice that most I do abhor,
    And most desire should meet the blow of justice;
    For which I would not plead, but that I must;
    For which I must not plead, but that I am
    At war 'twixt will and will not.
  ANGELO. Well; the matter?
  ISABELLA. I have a brother is condemn'd to die;
    I do beseech you, let it be his fault,
    And not my brother.
  PROVOST. [Aside] Heaven give thee moving graces.
  ANGELO. Condemn the fault and not the actor of it!
    Why, every fault's condemn'd ere it be done;
    Mine were the very cipher of a function,
    To fine the faults whose fine stands in record,
    And let go by the actor.
  ISABELLA. O just but severe law!
    I had a brother, then. Heaven keep your honour!
  LUCIO. [To ISABELLA] Give't not o'er so; to him again, entreat him,
    Kneel down before him, hang upon his gown;
    You are too cold: if you should need a pin,
    You could not with more tame a tongue desire it.
    To him, I say.
  ISABELLA. Must he needs die?
  ANGELO. Maiden, no remedy.
  ISABELLA. Yes; I do think that you might pardon him.
    And neither heaven nor man grieve at the mercy.
  ANGELO. I will not do't.
  ISABELLA. But can you, if you would?
  ANGELO. Look, what I will not, that I cannot do.
  ISABELLA. But might you do't, and do the world no wrong,
    If so your heart were touch'd with that remorse
    As mine is to him?
  ANGELO. He's sentenc'd; 'tis too late.
  LUCIO. [To ISABELLA] You are too cold.
  ISABELLA. Too late? Why, no; I, that do speak a word,
    May call it back again. Well, believe this:
    No ceremony that to great ones longs,
    Not the king's crown nor the deputed sword,
    The marshal's truncheon nor the judge's robe,
    Become them with one half so good a grace
    As mercy does.
    If he had been as you, and you as he,
    You would have slipp'd like him; but he, like you,
    Would not have been so stern.
  ANGELO. Pray you be gone.
  ISABELLA. I would to heaven I had your potency,
    And you were Isabel! Should it then be thus?
    No; I would tell what 'twere to be a judge
    And what a prisoner.
  LUCIO. [To ISABELLA] Ay, touch him; there's the vein.
  ANGELO. Your brother is a forfeit of the law,
    And you but waste your words.
  ISABELLA. Alas! Alas!
    Why, all the souls that were were forfeit once;
    And He that might the vantage best have took
    Found out the remedy. How would you be
    If He, which is the top of judgment, should
    But judge you as you are? O, think on that;
    And mercy then will breathe within your lips,
    Like man new made.
  ANGELO. Be you content, fair maid.
    It is the law, not I condemn your brother.
    Were he my kinsman, brother, or my son,
    It should be thus with him. He must die to-morrow.
  ISABELLA. To-morrow! O, that's sudden! Spare him, spare him.
    He's not prepar'd for death. Even for our kitchens
    We kill the fowl of season; shall we serve heaven
    With less respect than we do minister
    To our gross selves? Good, good my lord, bethink you.
    Who is it that hath died for this offence?
    There's many have committed it.
  LUCIO. [Aside] Ay, well said.
  ANGELO. The law hath not been dead, though it hath slept.
    Those many had not dar'd to do that evil
    If the first that did th' edict infringe
    Had answer'd for his deed. Now 'tis awake,
    Takes note of what is done, and, like a prophet,
    Looks in a glass that shows what future evils-
    Either now or by remissness new conceiv'd,
    And so in progress to be hatch'd and born-
    Are now to have no successive degrees,
    But here they live to end.
  ISABELLA. Yet show some pity.
  ANGELO. I show it most of all when I show justice;
    For then I pity those I do not know,
    Which a dismiss'd offence would after gall,
    And do him right that, answering one foul wrong,
    Lives not to act another. Be satisfied;
    Your brother dies to-morrow; be content.
  ISABELLA. So you must be the first that gives this sentence,
    And he that suffers. O, it is excellent
    To have a giant's strength! But it is tyrannous
    To use it like a giant.
  LUCIO. [To ISABELLA] That's well said.
  ISABELLA. Could great men thunder
    As Jove himself does, Jove would never be quiet,
    For every pelting petty officer
    Would use his heaven for thunder,
    Nothing but thunder. Merciful Heaven,
    Thou rather, with thy sharp and sulphurous bolt,
    Splits the unwedgeable and gnarled oak
    Than the soft myrtle. But man, proud man,
    Dress'd in a little brief authority,
    Most ignorant of what he's most assur'd,
    His glassy essence, like an angry ape,
    Plays such fantastic tricks before high heaven
    As makes the angels weep; who, with our speens,
    Would all themselves laugh mortal.
  LUCIO. [To ISABELLA] O, to him, to him, wench! He will relent;
    He's coming; I perceive 't.
  PROVOST. [Aside] Pray heaven she win him.
  ISABELLA. We cannot weigh our brother with ourself.
    Great men may jest with saints: 'tis wit in them;
    But in the less foul profanation.
  LUCIO. [To ISABELLA] Thou'rt i' th' right, girl; more o' that.
  ISABELLA. That in the captain's but a choleric word
    Which in the soldier is flat blasphemy.
  LUCIO. [To ISABELLA] Art avis'd o' that? More on't.
  ANGELO. Why do you put these sayings upon me?
  ISABELLA. Because authority, though it err like others,
    Hath yet a kind of medicine in itself
    That skins the vice o' th' top. Go to your bosom,
    Knock there, and ask your heart what it doth know
    That's like my brother's fault. If it confess
    A natural guiltiness such as is his,
    Let it not sound a thought upon your tongue
    Against my brother's life.
  ANGELO. [Aside] She speaks, and 'tis
    Such sense that my sense breeds with it.- Fare you well.
  ISABELLA. Gentle my lord, turn back.
  ANGELO. I will bethink me. Come again to-morrow.
  ISABELLA. Hark how I'll bribe you; good my lord, turn back.
  ANGELO. How, bribe me?
  ISABELLA. Ay, with such gifts that heaven shall share with you.
  LUCIO. [To ISABELLA) You had marr'd all else.
  ISABELLA. Not with fond sicles of the tested gold,
    Or stones, whose rate are either rich or poor
    As fancy values them; but with true prayers
    That shall be up at heaven and enter there
    Ere sun-rise, prayers from preserved souls,
    From fasting maids, whose minds are dedicate
    To nothing temporal.
  ANGELO. Well; come to me to-morrow.
  LUCIO. [To ISABELLA] Go to; 'tis well; away.
  ISABELLA. Heaven keep your honour safe!
  ANGELO. [Aside] Amen; for I
    Am that way going to temptation
    Where prayers cross.
  ISABELLA. At what hour to-morrow
    Shall I attend your lordship?
  ANGELO. At any time 'fore noon.
  ISABELLA. Save your honour!              Exeunt all but ANGELO
  ANGELO. From thee; even from thy virtue!
    What's this, what's this? Is this her fault or mine?
    The tempter or the tempted, who sins most?
    Ha!
    Not she; nor doth she tempt; but it is I
    That, lying by the violet in the sun,
    Do as the carrion does, not as the flow'r,
    Corrupt with virtuous season. Can it be
    That modesty may more betray our sense
    Than woman's lightness? Having waste ground enough,
    Shall we desire to raze the sanctuary,
    And pitch our evils there? O, fie, fie, fie!
    What dost thou, or what art thou, Angelo?
    Dost thou desire her foully for those things
    That make her good? O, let her brother live!
    Thieves for their robbery have authority
    When judges steal themselves. What, do I love her,
    That I desire to hear her speak again,
    And feast upon her eyes? What is't I dream on?
    O cunning enemy, that, to catch a saint,
    With saints dost bait thy hook! Most dangerous
    Is that temptation that doth goad us on
    To sin in loving virtue. Never could the strumpet,
    With all her double vigour, art and nature,
    Once stir my temper; but this virtuous maid
    Subdues me quite. Ever till now,
    When men were fond, I smil'd and wond'red how.          Exit




SCENE III.
A prison

Enter, severally, DUKE, disguised as a FRIAR, and PROVOST

  DUKE. Hail to you, Provost! so I think you are.
  PROVOST. I am the Provost. What's your will, good friar?
  DUKE. Bound by my charity and my blest order,
    I come to visit the afflicted spirits
    Here in the prison. Do me the common right
    To let me see them, and to make me know
    The nature of their crimes, that I may minister
    To them accordingly.
  PROVOST. I would do more than that, if more were needful.

                          Enter JULIET

    Look, here comes one; a gentlewoman of mine,
    Who, falling in the flaws of her own youth,
    Hath blister'd her report. She is with child;
    And he that got it, sentenc'd- a young man
    More fit to do another such offence
    Than die for this.
  DUKE. When must he die?
  PROVOST. As I do think, to-morrow.
    [To JULIET] I have provided for you; stay awhile
    And you shall be conducted.
  DUKE. Repent you, fair one, of the sin you carry?
  JULIET. I do; and bear the shame most patiently.
  DUKE. I'll teach you how you shall arraign your conscience,
    And try your penitence, if it be sound
    Or hollowly put on.
  JULIET. I'll gladly learn.
  DUKE. Love you the man that wrong'd you?
  JULIET. Yes, as I love the woman that wrong'd him.
  DUKE. So then, it seems, your most offenceful act
    Was mutually committed.
  JULIET. Mutually.
  DUKE. Then was your sin of heavier kind than his.
  JULIET. I do confess it, and repent it, father.
  DUKE. 'Tis meet so, daughter; but lest you do repent
    As that the sin hath brought you to this shame,
    Which sorrow is always toward ourselves, not heaven,
    Showing we would not spare heaven as we love it,
    But as we stand in fear-
  JULIET. I do repent me as it is an evil,
    And take the shame with joy.
  DUKE. There rest.
    Your partner, as I hear, must die to-morrow,
    And I am going with instruction to him.
    Grace go with you! Benedicite!                          Exit
  JULIET. Must die to-morrow! O, injurious law,
    That respites me a life whose very comfort
    Is still a dying horror!
  PROVOST. 'Tis pity of him.                              Exeunt




SCENE IV.
ANGELO'S house

Enter ANGELO

  ANGELO. When I would pray and think, I think and pray
    To several subjects. Heaven hath my empty words,
    Whilst my invention, hearing not my tongue,
    Anchors on Isabel. Heaven in my mouth,
    As if I did but only chew his name,
    And in my heart the strong and swelling evil
    Of my conception. The state whereon I studied
    Is, like a good thing being often read,
    Grown sere and tedious; yea, my gravity,
    Wherein- let no man hear me- I take pride,
    Could I with boot change for an idle plume
    Which the air beats for vain. O place, O form,
    How often dost thou with thy case, thy habit,
    Wrench awe from fools, and tie the wiser souls
    To thy false seeming! Blood, thou art blood.
    Let's write 'good angel' on the devil's horn;
    'Tis not the devil's crest.

                           Enter SERVANT

    How now, who's there?
  SERVANT. One Isabel, a sister, desires access to you.
  ANGELO. Teach her the way. [Exit SERVANT] O heavens!
    Why does my blood thus muster to my heart,
    Making both it unable for itself
    And dispossessing all my other parts
    Of necessary fitness?
    So play the foolish throngs with one that swoons;
    Come all to help him, and so stop the air
    By which he should revive; and even so
    The general subject to a well-wish'd king
    Quit their own part, and in obsequious fondness
    Crowd to his presence, where their untaught love
    Must needs appear offence.

                            Enter ISABELLA

    How now, fair maid?
  ISABELLA. I am come to know your pleasure.
  ANGELO. That you might know it would much better please me
    Than to demand what 'tis. Your brother cannot live.
  ISABELLA. Even so! Heaven keep your honour!
  ANGELO. Yet may he live awhile, and, it may be,
    As long as you or I; yet he must die.
  ISABELLA. Under your sentence?
  ANGELO. Yea.
  ISABELLA. When? I beseech you; that in his reprieve,
    Longer or shorter, he may be so fitted
    That his soul sicken not.
  ANGELO. Ha! Fie, these filthy vices! It were as good
    To pardon him that hath from nature stol'n
    A man already made, as to remit
    Their saucy sweetness that do coin heaven's image
    In stamps that are forbid; 'tis all as easy
    Falsely to take away a life true made
    As to put metal in restrained means
    To make a false one.
  ISABELLA. 'Tis set down so in heaven, but not in earth.
  ANGELO. Say you so? Then I shall pose you quickly.
    Which had you rather- that the most just law
    Now took your brother's life; or, to redeem him,
    Give up your body to such sweet uncleanness
    As she that he hath stain'd?
  ISABELLA. Sir, believe this:
    I had rather give my body than my soul.
  ANGELO. I talk not of your soul; our compell'd sins
    Stand more for number than for accompt.
  ISABELLA. How say you?
  ANGELO. Nay, I'll not warrant that; for I can speak
    Against the thing I say. Answer to this:
    I, now the voice of the recorded law,
    Pronounce a sentence on your brother's life;
    Might there not be a charity in sin
    To save this brother's life?
  ISABELLA. Please you to do't,
    I'll take it as a peril to my soul
    It is no sin at all, but charity.
  ANGELO. Pleas'd you to do't at peril of your soul,
    Were equal poise of sin and charity.
  ISABELLA. That I do beg his life, if it be sin,
    Heaven let me bear it! You granting of my suit,
    If that be sin, I'll make it my morn prayer
    To have it added to the faults of mine,
    And nothing of your answer.
  ANGELO. Nay, but hear me;
    Your sense pursues not mine; either you are ignorant
    Or seem so, craftily; and that's not good.
  ISABELLA. Let me be ignorant, and in nothing good
    But graciously to know I am no better.
  ANGELO. Thus wisdom wishes to appear most bright
    When it doth tax itself; as these black masks
    Proclaim an enshielded beauty ten times louder
    Than beauty could, display'd. But mark me:
    To be received plain, I'll speak more gross-
    Your brother is to die.
  ISABELLA. So.
  ANGELO. And his offence is so, as it appears,
    Accountant to the law upon that pain.
  ISABELLA. True.
  ANGELO. Admit no other way to save his life,
    As I subscribe not that, nor any other,
    But, in the loss of question, that you, his sister,
    Finding yourself desir'd of such a person
    Whose credit with the judge, or own great place,
    Could fetch your brother from the manacles
    Of the all-binding law; and that there were
    No earthly mean to save him but that either
    You must lay down the treasures of your body
    To this supposed, or else to let him suffer-
    What would you do?
  ISABELLA. As much for my poor brother as myself;
    That is, were I under the terms of death,
    Th' impression of keen whips I'd wear as rubies,
    And strip myself to death as to a bed
    That longing have been sick for, ere I'd yield
    My body up to shame.
  ANGELO. Then must your brother die.
  ISABELLA. And 'twere the cheaper way:
    Better it were a brother died at once
    Than that a sister, by redeeming him,
    Should die for ever.
  ANGELO. Were not you, then, as cruel as the sentence
    That you have slander'd so?
  ISABELLA. Ignominy in ransom and free pardon
    Are of two houses: lawful mercy
    Is nothing kin to foul redemption.
  ANGELO. You seem'd of late to make the law a tyrant;
    And rather prov'd the sliding of your brother
    A merriment than a vice.
  ISABELLA. O, pardon me, my lord! It oft falls out,
    To have what we would have, we speak not what we mean:
    I something do excuse the thing I hate
    For his advantage that I dearly love.
  ANGELO. We are all frail.
  ISABELLA. Else let my brother die,
    If not a fedary but only he
    Owe and succeed thy weakness.
  ANGELO. Nay, women are frail too.
  ISABELLA. Ay, as the glasses where they view themselves,
    Which are as easy broke as they make forms.
    Women, help heaven! Men their creation mar
    In profiting by them. Nay, call us ten times frail;
    For we are soft as our complexions are,
    And credulous to false prints.
  ANGELO. I think it well;
    And from this testimony of your own sex,
    Since I suppose we are made to be no stronger
    Than faults may shake our frames, let me be bold.
    I do arrest your words. Be that you are,
    That is, a woman; if you be more, you're none;
    If you be one, as you are well express'd
    By all external warrants, show it now
    By putting on the destin'd livery.
  ISABELLA. I have no tongue but one; gentle, my lord,
    Let me intreat you speak the former language.
  ANGELO. Plainly conceive, I love you.
  ISABELLA. My brother did love Juliet,
    And you tell me that he shall die for't.
  ANGELO. He shall not, Isabel, if you give me love.
  ISABELLA. I know your virtue hath a license in't,
    Which seems a little fouler than it is,
    To pluck on others.
  ANGELO. Believe me, on mine honour,
    My words express my purpose.
  ISABELLA. Ha! little honour to be much believ'd,
    And most pernicious purpose! Seeming, seeming!
    I will proclaim thee, Angelo, look for't.
    Sign me a present pardon for my brother
    Or, with an outstretch'd throat, I'll tell the world aloud
    What man thou art.
  ANGELO. Who will believe thee, Isabel?
    My unsoil'd name, th' austereness of my life,
    My vouch against you, and my place i' th' state,
    Will so your accusation overweigh
    That you shall stifle in your own report,
    And smell of calumny. I have begun,
    And now I give my sensual race the rein:
    Fit thy consent to my sharp appetite;
    Lay by all nicety and prolixious blushes
    That banish what they sue for; redeem thy brother
    By yielding up thy body to my will;
    Or else he must not only die the death,
    But thy unkindness shall his death draw out
    To ling'ring sufferance. Answer me to-morrow,
    Or, by the affection that now guides me most,
    I'll prove a tyrant to him. As for you,
    Say what you can: my false o'erweighs your true.        Exit
  ISABELLA. To whom should I complain? Did I tell this,
    Who would believe me? O perilous mouths
    That bear in them one and the self-same tongue
    Either of condemnation or approof,
    Bidding the law make curtsy to their will;
    Hooking both right and wrong to th' appetite,
    To follow as it draws! I'll to my brother.
    Though he hath fall'n by prompture of the blood,
    Yet hath he in him such a mind of honour
    That, had he twenty heads to tender down
    On twenty bloody blocks, he'd yield them up
    Before his sister should her body stoop
    To such abhorr'd pollution.
    Then, Isabel, live chaste, and, brother, die:
    More than our brother is our chastity.
    I'll tell him yet of Angelo's request,
    And fit his mind to death, for his soul's rest.         Exit




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT III. SCENE I.
The prison

Enter DUKE, disguised as before, CLAUDIO, and PROVOST

  DUKE. So, then you hope of pardon from Lord Angelo?
  CLAUDIO. The miserable have no other medicine
    But only hope:
    I have hope to Eve, and am prepar'd to die.
  DUKE. Be absolute for death; either death or life
    Shall thereby be the sweeter. Reason thus with life.
    If I do lose thee, I do lose a thing
    That none but fools would keep. A breath thou art,
    Servile to all the skyey influences,
    That dost this habitation where thou keep'st
    Hourly afflict. Merely, thou art Death's fool;
    For him thou labour'st by thy flight to shun
    And yet run'st toward him still. Thou art not noble;
    For all th' accommodations that thou bear'st
    Are nurs'd by baseness. Thou 'rt by no means valiant;
    For thou dost fear the soft and tender fork
    Of a poor worm. Thy best of rest is sleep,
    And that thou oft provok'st; yet grossly fear'st
    Thy death, which is no more. Thou art not thyself;
    For thou exists on many a thousand grains
    That issue out of dust. Happy thou art not;
    For what thou hast not, still thou striv'st to get,
    And what thou hast, forget'st. Thou art not certain;
    For thy complexion shifts to strange effects,
    After the moon. If thou art rich, thou'rt poor;
    For, like an ass whose back with ingots bows,
    Thou bear'st thy heavy riches but a journey,
    And Death unloads thee. Friend hast thou none;
    For thine own bowels which do call thee sire,
    The mere effusion of thy proper loins,
    Do curse the gout, serpigo, and the rheum,
    For ending thee no sooner. Thou hast nor youth nor age,
    But, as it were, an after-dinner's sleep,
    Dreaming on both; for all thy blessed youth
    Becomes as aged, and doth beg the alms
    Of palsied eld; and when thou art old and rich,
    Thou hast neither heat, affection, limb, nor beauty,
    To make thy riches pleasant. What's yet in this
    That bears the name of life? Yet in this life
    Lie hid moe thousand deaths; yet death we fear,
    That makes these odds all even.
  CLAUDIO. I humbly thank you.
    To sue to live, I find I seek to die;
    And, seeking death, find life. Let it come on.
  ISABELLA. [Within] What, ho! Peace here; grace and good company!
  PROVOST. Who's there? Come in; the wish deserves a welcome.
  DUKE. Dear sir, ere long I'll visit you again.
  CLAUDIO. Most holy sir, I thank you.

                        Enter ISABELLA

  ISABELLA. My business is a word or two with Claudio.
  PROVOST. And very welcome. Look, signior, here's your sister.
  DUKE. Provost, a word with you.
  PROVOST. As many as you please.
  DUKE. Bring me to hear them speak, where I may be conceal'd.
                                         Exeunt DUKE and PROVOST
  CLAUDIO. Now, sister, what's the comfort?
  ISABELLA. Why,
    As all comforts are; most good, most good, indeed.
    Lord Angelo, having affairs to heaven,
    Intends you for his swift ambassador,
    Where you shall be an everlasting leiger.
    Therefore, your best appointment make with speed;
    To-morrow you set on.
  CLAUDIO. Is there no remedy?
  ISABELLA. None, but such remedy as, to save a head,
    To cleave a heart in twain.
  CLAUDIO. But is there any?
  ISABELLA. Yes, brother, you may live:
    There is a devilish mercy in the judge,
    If you'll implore it, that will free your life,
    But fetter you till death.
  CLAUDIO. Perpetual durance?
  ISABELLA. Ay, just; perpetual durance, a restraint,
    Though all the world's vastidity you had,
    To a determin'd scope.
  CLAUDIO. But in what nature?
  ISABELLA. In such a one as, you consenting to't,
    Would bark your honour from that trunk you bear,
    And leave you naked.
  CLAUDIO. Let me know the point.
  ISABELLA. O, I do fear thee, Claudio; and I quake,
    Lest thou a feverous life shouldst entertain,
    And six or seven winters more respect
    Than a perpetual honour. Dar'st thou die?
    The sense of death is most in apprehension;
    And the poor beetle that we tread upon
    In corporal sufferance finds a pang as great
    As when a giant dies.
  CLAUDIO. Why give you me this shame?
    Think you I can a resolution fetch
    From flow'ry tenderness? If I must die,
    I will encounter darkness as a bride
    And hug it in mine arms.
  ISABELLA. There spake my brother; there my father's grave
    Did utter forth a voice. Yes, thou must die:
    Thou art too noble to conserve a life
    In base appliances. This outward-sainted deputy,
    Whose settled visage and deliberate word
    Nips youth i' th' head, and follies doth enew
    As falcon doth the fowl, is yet a devil;
    His filth within being cast, he would appear
    A pond as deep as hell.
  CLAUDIO. The precise Angelo!
  ISABELLA. O, 'tis the cunning livery of hell
    The damned'st body to invest and cover
    In precise guards! Dost thou think, Claudio,
    If I would yield him my virginity
    Thou mightst be freed?
  CLAUDIO. O heavens! it cannot be.
  ISABELLA. Yes, he would give't thee, from this rank offence,
    So to offend him still. This night's the time
    That I should do what I abhor to name,
    Or else thou diest to-morrow.
  CLAUDIO. Thou shalt not do't.
  ISABELLA. O, were it but my life!
    I'd throw it down for your deliverance
    As frankly as a pin.
  CLAUDIO. Thanks, dear Isabel.
  ISABELLA. Be ready, Claudio, for your death to-morrow.
  CLAUDIO. Yes. Has he affections in him
    That thus can make him bite the law by th' nose
    When he would force it? Sure it is no sin;
    Or of the deadly seven it is the least.
  ISABELLA. Which is the least?
  CLAUDIO. If it were damnable, he being so wise,
    Why would he for the momentary trick
    Be perdurably fin'd?- O Isabel!
  ISABELLA. What says my brother?
  CLAUDIO. Death is a fearful thing.
  ISABELLA. And shamed life a hateful.
  CLAUDIO. Ay, but to die, and go we know not where;
    To lie in cold obstruction, and to rot;
    This sensible warm motion to become
    A kneaded clod; and the delighted spirit
    To bathe in fiery floods or to reside
    In thrilling region of thick-ribbed ice;
    To be imprison'd in the viewless winds,
    And blown with restless violence round about
    The pendent world; or to be worse than worst
    Of those that lawless and incertain thought
    Imagine howling- 'tis too horrible.
    The weariest and most loathed worldly life
    That age, ache, penury, and imprisonment,
    Can lay on nature is a paradise
    To what we fear of death.
  ISABELLA. Alas, alas!
  CLAUDIO. Sweet sister, let me live.
    What sin you do to save a brother's life,
    Nature dispenses with the deed so far
    That it becomes a virtue.
  ISABELLA. O you beast!
    O faithless coward! O dishonest wretch!
    Wilt thou be made a man out of my vice?
    Is't not a kind of incest to take life
    From thine own sister's shame? What should I think?
    Heaven shield my mother play'd my father fair!
    For such a warped slip of wilderness
    Ne'er issu'd from his blood. Take my defiance;
    Die; perish. Might but my bending down
    Reprieve thee from thy fate, it should proceed.
    I'll pray a thousand prayers for thy death,
    No word to save thee.
  CLAUDIO. Nay, hear me, Isabel.
  ISABELLA. O fie, fie, fie!
    Thy sin's not accidental, but a trade.
    Mercy to thee would prove itself a bawd;
    'Tis best that thou diest quickly.
  CLAUDIO. O, hear me, Isabella.

                            Re-enter DUKE

  DUKE. Vouchsafe a word, young sister, but one word.
  ISABELLA. What is your will?
  DUKE. Might you dispense with your leisure, I would by and by have
    some speech with you; the satisfaction I would require is
    likewise your own benefit.
  ISABELLA. I have no superfluous leisure; my stay must be stolen out
    of other affairs; but I will attend you awhile.
                                                   [Walks apart]
  DUKE. Son, I have overheard what hath pass'd between you and your
    sister. Angelo had never the purpose to corrupt her; only he hath
    made an assay of her virtue to practise his judgment with the
    disposition of natures. She, having the truth of honour in her,
    hath made him that gracious denial which he is most glad to
    receive. I am confessor to Angelo, and I know this to be true;
    therefore prepare yourself to death. Do not satisfy your
    resolution with hopes that are fallible; to-morrow you must die;
    go to your knees and make ready.
  CLAUDIO. Let me ask my sister pardon. I am so out of love with life
    that I will sue to be rid of it.
  DUKE. Hold you there. Farewell. [Exit CLAUDIO] Provost, a word with
    you.

                          Re-enter PROVOST

  PROVOST. What's your will, father?
  DUKE. That, now you are come, you will be gone. Leave me a while
    with the maid; my mind promises with my habit no loss shall touch
    her by my company.
  PROVOST. In good time.                            Exit PROVOST
  DUKE. The hand that hath made you fair hath made you good; the
    goodness that is cheap in beauty makes beauty brief in goodness;
    but grace, being the soul of your complexion, shall keep the body
    of it ever fair. The assault that Angelo hath made to you,
    fortune hath convey'd to my understanding; and, but that frailty
    hath examples for his falling, I should wonder at Angelo. How
    will you do to content this substitute, and to save your brother?
  ISABELLA. I am now going to resolve him; I had rather my brother
    die by the law than my son should be unlawfully born. But, O, how
    much is the good Duke deceiv'd in Angelo! If ever he return, and
    I can speak to him, I will open my lips in vain, or discover his
    government.
  DUKE. That shall not be much amiss; yet, as the matter now stands,
    he will avoid your accusation: he made trial of you only.
    Therefore fasten your ear on my advisings; to the love I have in
    doing good a remedy presents itself. I do make myself believe
    that you may most uprighteously do a poor wronged lady a merited
    benefit; redeem your brother from the angry law; do no stain to
    your own gracious person; and much please the absent Duke, if
    peradventure he shall ever return to have hearing of this
    business.
  ISABELLA. Let me hear you speak farther; I have spirit to do
    anything that appears not foul in the truth of my spirit.
  DUKE. Virtue is bold, and goodness never fearful. Have you not
    heard speak of Mariana, the sister of Frederick, the great
    soldier who miscarried at sea?
  ISABELLA. I have heard of the lady, and good words went with her
    name.
  DUKE. She should this Angelo have married; was affianced to her by
    oath, and the nuptial appointed; between which time of the
    contract and limit of the solemnity her brother Frederick was
    wreck'd at sea, having in that perished vessel the dowry of his
    sister. But mark how heavily this befell to the poor gentlewoman:
    there she lost a noble and renowned brother, in his love toward
    her ever most kind and natural; with him the portion and sinew of
    her fortune, her marriage-dowry; with both, her combinate
    husband, this well-seeming Angelo.
  ISABELLA. Can this be so? Did Angelo so leave her?
  DUKE. Left her in her tears, and dried not one of them with his
    comfort; swallowed his vows whole, pretending in her discoveries
    of dishonour; in few, bestow'd her on her own lamentation, which
    she yet wears for his sake; and he, a marble to her tears, is
    washed with them, but relents not.
  ISABELLA. What a merit were it in death to take this poor maid from
    the world! What corruption in this life that it will let this man
    live! But how out of this can she avail?
  DUKE. It is a rupture that you may easily heal; and the cure of it
    not only saves your brother, but keeps you from dishonour in
    doing it.
  ISABELLA. Show me how, good father.
  DUKE. This forenamed maid hath yet in her the continuance of her
    first affection; his unjust unkindness, that in all reason should
    have quenched her love, hath, like an impediment in the current,
    made it more violent and unruly. Go you to Angelo; answer his
    requiring with a plausible obedience; agree with his demands to
    the point; only refer yourself to this advantage: first, that
    your stay with him may not be long; that the time may have all
    shadow and silence in it; and the place answer to convenience.
    This being granted in course- and now follows all: we shall
    advise this wronged maid to stead up your appointment, go in your
    place. If the encounter acknowledge itself hereafter, it may
    compel him to her recompense; and here, by this, is your brother
    saved, your honour untainted, the poor Mariana advantaged, and
    the corrupt deputy scaled. The maid will I frame and make fit for
    his attempt. If you think well to carry this as you may, the
    doubleness of the benefit defends the deceit from reproof. What
    think you of it?
  ISABELLA. The image of it gives me content already; and I trust it
    will grow to a most prosperous perfection.
  DUKE. It lies much in your holding up. Haste you speedily to
    Angelo; if for this night he entreat you to his bed, give him
    promise of satisfaction. I will presently to Saint Luke's; there,
    at the moated grange, resides this dejected Mariana. At that
    place call upon me; and dispatch with Angelo, that it may be
    quickly.
  ISABELLA. I thank you for this comfort. Fare you well, good father.
                                                Exeunt severally




Scene II.
The street before the prison

Enter, on one side, DUKE disguised as before; on the other, ELBOW,
and OFFICERS with POMPEY

  ELBOW. Nay, if there be no remedy for it, but that you will needs
    buy and sell men and women like beasts, we shall have all the
    world drink brown and white bastard.
  DUKE. O heavens! what stuff is here?
  POMPEY. 'Twas never merry world since, of two usuries, the merriest
    was put down, and the worser allow'd by order of law a furr'd
    gown to keep him warm; and furr'd with fox on lamb-skins too, to
    signify that craft, being richer than innocency, stands for the
    facing.
  ELBOW. Come your way, sir. Bless you, good father friar.
  DUKE. And you, good brother father. What offence hath this man made
    you, sir?
  ELBOW. Marry, sir, he hath offended the law; and, sir, we take him
    to be a thief too, sir, for we have found upon him, sir, a
    strange picklock, which we have sent to the deputy.
  DUKE. Fie, sirrah, a bawd, a wicked bawd!
    The evil that thou causest to be done,
    That is thy means to live. Do thou but think
    What 'tis to cram a maw or clothe a back
    From such a filthy vice; say to thyself
    'From their abominable and beastly touches
    I drink, I eat, array myself, and live.'
    Canst thou believe thy living is a life,
    So stinkingly depending? Go mend, go mend.
  POMPEY. Indeed, it does stink in some sort, sir; but yet, sir,
    I would prove-
  DUKE. Nay, if the devil have given thee proofs for sin,
    Thou wilt prove his. Take him to prison, officer;
    Correction and instruction must both work
    Ere this rude beast will profit.
  ELBOW. He must before the deputy, sir; he has given him warning.
    The deputy cannot abide a whoremaster; if he be a whoremonger,
    and comes before him, he were as good go a mile on his errand.
  DUKE. That we were all, as some would seem to be,
    From our faults, as his faults from seeming, free.
  ELBOW. His neck will come to your waist- a cord, sir.

                          Enter LUCIO

  POMPEY. I spy comfort; I cry bail. Here's a gentleman, and a friend
    of mine.
  LUCIO. How now, noble Pompey! What, at the wheels of Caesar? Art
    thou led in triumph? What, is there none of Pygmalion's images,
    newly made woman, to be had now for putting the hand in the
    pocket and extracting it clutch'd? What reply, ha? What say'st
    thou to this tune, matter, and method? Is't not drown'd i' th'
    last rain, ha? What say'st thou, trot? Is the world as it was,
    man? Which is the way? Is it sad, and few words? or how? The
    trick of it?
  DUKE. Still thus, and thus; still worse!
  LUCIO. How doth my dear morsel, thy mistress? Procures she still,
    ha?
  POMPEY. Troth, sir, she hath eaten up all her beef, and she is
    herself in the tub.
  LUCIO. Why, 'tis good; it is the right of it; it must be so; ever
    your fresh whore and your powder'd bawd- an unshunn'd
    consequence; it must be so. Art going to prison, Pompey?
  POMPEY. Yes, faith, sir.
  LUCIO. Why, 'tis not amiss, Pompey. Farewell; go, say I sent thee
    thither. For debt, Pompey- or how?
  ELBOW. For being a bawd, for being a bawd.
  LUCIO. Well, then, imprison him. If imprisonment be the due of a
    bawd, why, 'tis his right. Bawd is he doubtless, and of
    antiquity, too; bawd-born. Farewell, good Pompey. Commend me to
    the prison, Pompey. You will turn good husband now, Pompey; you
    will keep the house.
  POMPEY. I hope, sir, your good worship will be my bail.
  LUCIO. No, indeed, will I not, Pompey; it is not the wear. I will
    pray, Pompey, to increase your bondage. If you take it not
    patiently, why, your mettle is the more. Adieu trusty Pompey.
    Bless you, friar.
  DUKE. And you.
  LUCIO. Does Bridget paint still, Pompey, ha?
  ELBOW. Come your ways, sir; come.
  POMPEY. You will not bail me then, sir?
  LUCIO. Then, Pompey, nor now. What news abroad, friar? what news?
  ELBOW. Come your ways, sir; come.
  LUCIO. Go to kennel, Pompey, go.

                               Exeunt ELBOW, POMPEY and OFFICERS

    What news, friar, of the Duke?
  DUKE. I know none. Can you tell me of any?
  LUCIO. Some say he is with the Emperor of Russia; other some, he is
    in Rome; but where is he, think you?
  DUKE. I know not where; but wheresoever, I wish him well.
  LUCIO. It was a mad fantastical trick of him to steal from the
    state and usurp the beggary he was never born to. Lord Angelo
    dukes it well in his absence; he puts transgression to't.
  DUKE. He does well in't.
  LUCIO. A little more lenity to lechery would do no harm in him;
    something too crabbed that way, friar.
  DUKE. It is too general a vice, and severity must cure it.
  LUCIO. Yes, in good sooth, the vice is of a great kindred; it is
    well allied; but it is impossible to extirp it quite, friar, till
    eating and drinking be put down. They say this Angelo was not
    made by man and woman after this downright way of creation. Is it
    true, think you?
  DUKE. How should he be made, then?
  LUCIO. Some report a sea-maid spawn'd him; some, that he was begot
    between two stock-fishes. But it is certain that when he makes
    water his urine is congeal'd ice; that I know to be true. And he
    is a motion generative; that's infallible.
  DUKE. You are pleasant, sir, and speak apace.
  LUCIO. Why, what a ruthless thing is this in him, for the rebellion
    of a codpiece to take away the life of a man! Would the Duke that
    is absent have done this? Ere he would have hang'd a man for the
    getting a hundred bastards, he would have paid for the nursing a
    thousand. He had some feeling of the sport; he knew the service,
    and that instructed him to mercy.
  DUKE. I never heard the absent Duke much detected for women; he was
    not inclin'd that way.
  LUCIO. O, sir, you are deceiv'd.
  DUKE. 'Tis not possible.
  LUCIO. Who- not the Duke? Yes, your beggar of fifty; and his use
    was to put a ducat in her clack-dish. The Duke had crotchets in
    him. He would be drunk too; that let me inform you.
  DUKE. You do him wrong, surely.
  LUCIO. Sir, I was an inward of his. A shy fellow was the Duke; and
    I believe I know the cause of his withdrawing.
  DUKE. What, I prithee, might be the cause?
  LUCIO. No, pardon; 'tis a secret must be lock'd within the teeth
    and the lips; but this I can let you understand: the greater file
    of the subject held the Duke to be wise.
  DUKE. Wise? Why, no question but he was.
  LUCIO. A very superficial, ignorant, unweighing fellow.
  DUKE. Either this is envy in you, folly, or mistaking; the very
    stream of his life, and the business he hath helmed, must, upon a
    warranted need, give him a better proclamation. Let him be but
    testimonied in his own bringings-forth, and he shall appear to
    the envious a scholar, a statesman, and a soldier. Therefore you
    speak unskilfully; or, if your knowledge be more, it is much
    dark'ned in your malice.
  LUCIO. Sir, I know him, and I love him.
  DUKE. Love talks with better knowledge, and knowledge with dearer
    love.
  LUCIO. Come, sir, I know what I know.
  DUKE. I can hardly believe that, since you know not what you speak.
    But, if ever the Duke return, as our prayers are he may, let me
    desire you to make your answer before him. If it be honest you
    have spoke, you have courage to maintain it; I am bound to call
    upon you; and I pray you your name?
  LUCIO. Sir, my name is Lucio, well known to the Duke.
  DUKE. He shall know you better, sir, if I may live to report you.
  LUCIO. I fear you not.
  DUKE. O, you hope the Duke will return no more; or you imagine me
    too unhurtful an opposite. But, indeed, I can do you little harm:
    you'll forswear this again.
  LUCIO. I'll be hang'd first. Thou art deceiv'd in me, friar. But no
    more of this. Canst thou tell if Claudio die to-morrow or no?
  DUKE. Why should he die, sir?
  LUCIO. Why? For filling a bottle with a tun-dish. I would the Duke
    we talk of were return'd again. This ungenitur'd agent will
    unpeople the province with continency; sparrows must not build in
    his house-eaves because they are lecherous. The Duke yet would
    have dark deeds darkly answered; he would never bring them to
    light. Would he were return'd! Marry, this Claudio is condemned
    for untrussing. Farewell, good friar; I prithee pray for me. The
    Duke, I say to thee again, would eat mutton on Fridays. He's not
    past it yet; and, I say to thee, he would mouth with a beggar
    though she smelt brown bread and garlic. Say that I said so.
    Farewell.                                               Exit
  DUKE. No might nor greatness in mortality
    Can censure scape; back-wounding calumny
    The whitest virtue strikes. What king so strong
    Can tie the gall up in the slanderous tongue?
    But who comes here?

             Enter ESCALUS, PROVOST, and OFFICERS with
                           MISTRESS OVERDONE

  ESCALUS. Go, away with her to prison.
  MRS. OVERDONE. Good my lord, be good to me; your honour is
    accounted a merciful man; good my lord.
  ESCALUS. Double and treble admonition, and still forfeit in the
    same kind! This would make mercy swear and play the tyrant.
  PROVOST. A bawd of eleven years' continuance, may it please your
    honour.
  MRS. OVERDONE. My lord, this is one Lucio's information against me.
    Mistress Kate Keepdown was with child by him in the Duke's time;
    he promis'd her marriage. His child is a year and a quarter old
    come Philip and Jacob; I have kept it myself; and see how he goes
    about to abuse me.
  ESCALUS. That fellow is a fellow of much license. Let him be call'd
    before us. Away with her to prison. Go to; no more words. [Exeunt
    OFFICERS with MISTRESS OVERDONE]  Provost, my brother Angelo will
    not be alter'd: Claudio must die to-morrow. Let him be furnish'd
    with divines, and have all charitable preparation. If my brother
    wrought by my pity, it should not be so with him.
  PROVOST. So please you, this friar hath been with him, and advis'd
    him for th' entertainment of death.
  ESCALUS. Good even, good father.
  DUKE. Bliss and goodness on you!
  ESCALUS. Of whence are you?
  DUKE. Not of this country, though my chance is now
    To use it for my time. I am a brother
    Of gracious order, late come from the See
    In special business from his Holiness.
  ESCALUS. What news abroad i' th' world?
  DUKE. None, but that there is so great a fever on goodness that the
    dissolution of it must cure it. Novelty is only in request; and,
    as it is, as dangerous to be aged in any kind of course as it is
    virtuous to be constant in any undertakeing. There is scarce
    truth enough alive to make societies secure; but security enough
    to make fellowships accurst. Much upon this riddle runs the
    wisdom of the world. This news is old enough, yet it is every
    day's news. I pray you, sir, of what disposition was the Duke?
  ESCALUS. One that, above all other strifes, contended especially to
    know himself.
  DUKE. What pleasure was he given to?
  ESCALUS. Rather rejoicing to see another merry than merry at
    anything which profess'd to make him rejoice; a gentleman of all
    temperance. But leave we him to his events, with a prayer they
    may prove prosperous; and let me desire to know how you find
    Claudio prepar'd. I am made to understand that you have lent him
    visitation.
  DUKE. He professes to have received no sinister measure from his
    judge, but most willingly humbles himself to the determination of
    justice. Yet had he framed to himself, by the instruction of his
    frailty, many deceiving promises of life; which I, by my good
    leisure, have discredited to him, and now he is resolv'd to die.
  ESCALUS. You have paid the heavens your function, and the prisoner
    the very debt of your calling. I have labour'd for the poor
    gentleman to the extremest shore of my modesty; but my brother
    justice have I found so severe that he hath forc'd me to tell him
    he is indeed Justice.
  DUKE. If his own life answer the straitness of his proceeding, it
    shall become him well; wherein if he chance to fail, he hath
    sentenc'd himself.
  ESCALUS. I am going to visit the prisoner. Fare you well.
  DUKE. Peace be with you!            Exeunt ESCALUS and PROVOST

         He who the sword of heaven will bear
         Should be as holy as severe;
         Pattern in himself to know,
         Grace to stand, and virtue go;
         More nor less to others paying
         Than by self-offences weighing.
         Shame to him whose cruel striking
         Kills for faults of his own liking!
         Twice treble shame on Angelo,
         To weed my vice and let his grow!
         O, what may man within him hide,
         Though angel on the outward side!
         How may likeness, made in crimes,
         Make a practice on the times,
         To draw with idle spiders' strings
         Most ponderous and substantial things!
         Craft against vice I must apply.
         With Angelo to-night shall lie
         His old betrothed but despised;
         So disguise shall, by th' disguised,
         Pay with falsehood false exacting,
         And perform an old contracting.                    Exit




Act IV. Scene I.
The moated grange at Saint Duke's

Enter MARIANA; and BOY singing

                             SONG

           Take, O, take those lips away,
             That so sweetly were forsworn;
           And those eyes, the break of day,
             Lights that do mislead the morn;
           But my kisses bring again, bring again;
           Seals of love, but seal'd in vain, seal'd in vain.

                  Enter DUKE, disguised as before

  MARIANA. Break off thy song, and haste thee quick away;
    Here comes a man of comfort, whose advice
    Hath often still'd my brawling discontent.          Exit BOY
    I cry you mercy, sir, and well could wish
    You had not found me here so musical.
    Let me excuse me, and believe me so,
    My mirth it much displeas'd, but pleas'd my woe.
  DUKE. 'Tis good; though music oft hath such a charm
    To make bad good and good provoke to harm.
    I pray you tell me hath anybody inquir'd for me here to-day. Much
    upon this time have I promis'd here to meet.
  MARIANA. You have not been inquir'd after; I have sat here all day.

                         Enter ISABELLA

  DUKE. I do constantly believe you. The time is come even now. I
    shall crave your forbearance a little. May be I will call upon
    you anon, for some advantage to yourself.
  MARIANA. I am always bound to you.                        Exit
  DUKE. Very well met, and well come.
    What is the news from this good deputy?
  ISABELLA. He hath a garden circummur'd with brick,
    Whose western side is with a vineyard back'd;
    And to that vineyard is a planched gate
    That makes his opening with this bigger key;
    This other doth command a little door
    Which from the vineyard to the garden leads.
    There have I made my promise
    Upon the heavy middle of the night
    To call upon him.
  DUKE. But shall you on your knowledge find this way?
  ISABELLA. I have ta'en a due and wary note upon't;
    With whispering and most guilty diligence,
    In action all of precept, he did show me
    The way twice o'er.
  DUKE. Are there no other tokens
    Between you 'greed concerning her observance?
  ISABELLA. No, none, but only a repair i' th' dark;
    And that I have possess'd him my most stay
    Can be but brief; for I have made him know
    I have a servant comes with me along,
    That stays upon me; whose persuasion is
    I come about my brother.
  DUKE. 'Tis well borne up.
    I have not yet made known to Mariana
    A word of this. What ho, within! come forth.

                       Re-enter MARIANA

    I pray you be acquainted with this maid;
    She comes to do you good.
  ISABELLA. I do desire the like.
  DUKE. Do you persuade yourself that I respect you?
  MARIANA. Good friar, I know you do, and have found it.
  DUKE. Take, then, this your companion by the hand,
    Who hath a story ready for your ear.
    I shall attend your leisure; but make haste;
    The vaporous night approaches.
  MARIANA. Will't please you walk aside?
                                     Exeunt MARIANA and ISABELLA
  DUKE. O place and greatness! Millions of false eyes
    Are stuck upon thee. Volumes of report
    Run with these false, and most contrarious quest
    Upon thy doings. Thousand escapes of wit
    Make thee the father of their idle dream,
    And rack thee in their fancies.

                 Re-enter MARIANA and ISABELLA

    Welcome, how agreed?
  ISABELLA. She'll take the enterprise upon her, father,
    If you advise it.
  DUKE. It is not my consent,
    But my entreaty too.
  ISABELLA. Little have you to say,
    When you depart from him, but, soft and low,
    'Remember now my brother.'
  MARIANA. Fear me not.
  DUKE. Nor, gentle daughter, fear you not at all.
    He is your husband on a pre-contract.
    To bring you thus together 'tis no sin,
    Sith that the justice of your title to him
    Doth flourish the deceit. Come, let us go;
    Our corn's to reap, for yet our tithe's to sow.       Exeunt




SCENE II.
The prison

Enter PROVOST and POMPEY

  PROVOST. Come hither, sirrah. Can you cut off a man's head?
  POMPEY. If the man be a bachelor, sir, I can; but if he be a
    married man, he's his wife's head, and I can never cut of a
    woman's head.
  PROVOST. Come, sir, leave me your snatches and yield me a direct
    answer. To-morrow morning are to die Claudio and Barnardine. Here
    is in our prison a common executioner, who in his office lacks a
    helper; if you will take it on you to assist him, it shall redeem
    you from your gyves; if not, you shall have your full time of
    imprisonment, and your deliverance with an unpitied whipping, for
    you have been a notorious bawd.
  POMPEY. Sir, I have been an unlawful bawd time out of mind; but yet
    I will be content to be a lawful hangman. I would be glad to
    receive some instructions from my fellow partner.
  PROVOST. What ho, Abhorson! Where's Abhorson there?

                          Enter ABHORSON

  ABHORSON. Do you call, sir?
  PROVOST. Sirrah, here's a fellow will help you to-morrow in your
    execution. If you think it meet, compound with him by the year,
    and let him abide here with you; if not, use him for the present,
    and dismiss him. He cannot plead his estimation with you; he hath
    been a bawd.
  ABHORSON. A bawd, sir? Fie upon him! He will discredit our mystery.
  PROVOST. Go to, sir; you weigh equally; a feather will turn the
    scale.                                                  Exit
  POMPEY. Pray, sir, by your good favour- for surely, sir, a good
    favour you have but that you have a hanging look- do you call,
    sir, your occupation a mystery?
  ABHORSON. Ay, sir; a mystery.
  POMPEY. Painting, sir, I have heard say, is a mystery; and your
    whores, sir, being members of my occupation, using painting, do
    prove my occupation a mystery; but what mystery there should be
    in hanging, if I should be hang'd, I cannot imagine.
  ABHORSON. Sir, it is a mystery.
  POMPEY. Proof?
  ABHORSON. Every true man's apparel fits your thief: if it be too
    little for your thief, your true man thinks it big enough; if it
    be too big for your thief, your thief thinks it little enough; so
    every true man's apparel fits your thief.

                          Re-enter PROVOST

  PROVOST. Are you agreed?
  POMPEY. Sir, I will serve him; for I do find your hangman is a more
    penitent trade than your bawd; he doth oftener ask forgiveness.
  PROVOST. You, sirrah, provide your block and your axe to-morrow
    four o'clock.
  ABHORSON. Come on, bawd; I will instruct thee in my trade; follow.
  POMPEY. I do desire to learn, sir; and I hope, if you have occasion
    to use me for your own turn, you shall find me yare; for truly,
    sir, for your kindness I owe you a good turn.
  PROVOST. Call hither Barnardine and Claudio.
                                      Exeunt ABHORSON and POMPEY
    Th' one has my pity; not a jot the other,
    Being a murderer, though he were my brother.

                           Enter CLAUDIO

    Look, here's the warrant, Claudio, for thy death;
    'Tis now dead midnight, and by eight to-morrow
    Thou must be made immortal. Where's Barnardine?
  CLAUDIO. As fast lock'd up in sleep as guiltless labour
    When it lies starkly in the traveller's bones.
    He will not wake.
  PROVOST. Who can do good on him?
    Well, go, prepare yourself. [Knocking within] But hark, what
      noise?
    Heaven give your spirits comfort!               Exit CLAUDIO
    [Knocking continues] By and by.
    I hope it is some pardon or reprieve
    For the most gentle Claudio.

                 Enter DUKE, disguised as before

    Welcome, father.
  DUKE. The best and wholesom'st spirits of the night
    Envelop you, good Provost! Who call'd here of late?
  PROVOST. None, since the curfew rung.
  DUKE. Not Isabel?
  PROVOST. No.
  DUKE. They will then, ere't be long.
  PROVOST. What comfort is for Claudio?
  DUKE. There's some in hope.
  PROVOST. It is a bitter deputy.
  DUKE. Not so, not so; his life is parallel'd
    Even with the stroke and line of his great justice;
    He doth with holy abstinence subdue
    That in himself which he spurs on his pow'r
    To qualify in others. Were he meal'd with that
    Which he corrects, then were he tyrannous;
    But this being so, he's just. [Knocking within] Now are they
      come.                                         Exit PROVOST
    This is a gentle provost; seldom when
    The steeled gaoler is the friend of men. [Knocking within]
    How now, what noise! That spirit's possess'd with haste
    That wounds th' unsisting postern with these strokes.

                        Re-enter PROVOST

  PROVOST. There he must stay until the officer
    Arise to let him in; he is call'd up.
  DUKE. Have you no countermand for Claudio yet
    But he must die to-morrow?
  PROVOST. None, sir, none.
  DUKE. As near the dawning, Provost, as it is,
    You shall hear more ere morning.
  PROVOST. Happily
    You something know; yet I believe there comes
    No countermand; no such example have we.
    Besides, upon the very siege of justice,
    Lord Angelo hath to the public ear
    Profess'd the contrary.

                         Enter a MESSENGER
    This is his lordship's man.
  DUKE. And here comes Claudio's pardon.
  MESSENGER. My lord hath sent you this note; and by me this further
    charge, that you swerve not from the smallest article of it,
    neither in time, matter, or other circumstance. Good morrow; for
    as I take it, it is almost day.
  PROVOST. I shall obey him.                      Exit MESSENGER
  DUKE. [Aside] This is his pardon, purchas'd by such sin
    For which the pardoner himself is in;
    Hence hath offence his quick celerity,
    When it is borne in high authority.
    When vice makes mercy, mercy's so extended
    That for the fault's love is th' offender friended.
    Now, sir, what news?
  PROVOST. I told you: Lord Angelo, belike thinking me remiss in mine
    office, awakens me with this unwonted putting-on; methinks
    strangely, for he hath not us'd it before.
  DUKE. Pray you, let's hear.
  PROVOST. [Reads] 'Whatsoever you may hear to the contrary, let
    Claudio be executed by four of the clock, and, in the afternoon,
    Barnardine. For my better satisfaction, let me have Claudio's
    head sent me by five. Let this be duly performed, with a thought
    that more depends on it than we must yet deliver. Thus fail not
    to do your office, as you will answer it at your peril.'
    What say you to this, sir?
  DUKE. What is that Barnardine who is to be executed in th'
    afternoon?
  PROVOST. A Bohemian born; but here nurs'd up and bred.
    One that is a prisoner nine years old.
  DUKE. How came it that the absent Duke had not either deliver'd him
    to his liberty or executed him? I have heard it was ever his
    manner to do so.
  PROVOST. His friends still wrought reprieves for him; and, indeed,
    his fact, till now in the government of Lord Angelo, came not to
    an undoubted proof.
  DUKE. It is now apparent?
  PROVOST. Most manifest, and not denied by himself.
  DUKE. Hath he borne himself penitently in prison? How seems he to
    be touch'd?
  PROVOST. A man that apprehends death no more dreadfully but as a
    drunken sleep; careless, reckless, and fearless, of what's past,
    present, or to come; insensible of mortality and desperately
    mortal.
  DUKE. He wants advice.
  PROVOST. He will hear none. He hath evermore had the liberty of the
    prison; give him leave to escape hence, he would not; drunk many
    times a day, if not many days entirely drunk. We have very oft
    awak'd him, as if to carry him to execution, and show'd him a
    seeming warrant for it; it hath not moved him at all.
  DUKE. More of him anon. There is written in your brow, Provost,
    honesty and constancy. If I read it not truly, my ancient skill
    beguiles me; but in the boldness of my cunning I will lay myself
    in hazard. Claudio, whom here you have warrant to execute, is no
    greater forfeit to the law than Angelo who hath sentenc'd him. To
    make you understand this in a manifested effect, I crave but four
    days' respite; for the which you are to do me both a present and
    a dangerous courtesy.
  PROVOST. Pray, sir, in what?
  DUKE. In the delaying death.
  PROVOST. Alack! How may I do it, having the hour limited, and an
    express command, under penalty, to deliver his head in the view
    of Angelo? I may make my case as Claudio's, to cross this in the
    smallest.
  DUKE. By the vow of mine order, I warrant you, if my instructions
    may be your guide. Let this Barnardine be this morning executed,
    and his head borne to Angelo.
  PROVOST. Angelo hath seen them both, and will discover the favour.
  DUKE. O, death's a great disguiser; and you may add to it. Shave
    the head and tie the beard; and say it was the desire of the
    penitent to be so bar'd before his death. You know the course is
    common. If anything fall to you upon this more than thanks and
    good fortune, by the saint whom I profess, I will plead against
    it with my life.
  PROVOST. Pardon me, good father; it is against my oath.
  DUKE. Were you sworn to the Duke, or to the deputy?
  PROVOST. To him and to his substitutes.
  DUKE. You will think you have made no offence if the Duke avouch
    the justice of your dealing?
  PROVOST. But what likelihood is in that?
  DUKE. Not a resemblance, but a certainty. Yet since I see you
    fearful, that neither my coat, integrity, nor persuasion, can
    with ease attempt you, I will go further than I meant, to pluck
    all fears out of you. Look you, sir, here is the hand and seal of
    the Duke. You know the character, I doubt not; and the signet is
    not strange to you.
  PROVOST. I know them both.
  DUKE. The contents of this is the return of the Duke; you shall
    anon over-read it at your pleasure, where you shall find within
    these two days he will be here. This is a thing that Angelo knows
    not; for he this very day receives letters of strange tenour,
    perchance of the Duke's death, perchance entering into some
    monastery; but, by chance, nothing of what is writ. Look, th'
    unfolding star calls up the shepherd. Put not yourself into
    amazement how these things should be: all difficulties are but
    easy when they are known. Call your executioner, and off with
    Barnardine's head. I will give him a present shrift, and advise
    him for a better place. Yet you are amaz'd, but this shall
    absolutely resolve you. Come away; it is almost clear dawn.
                                                          Exeunt




SCENE III.
The prison

Enter POMPEY

  POMPEY. I am as well acquainted here as I was in our house of
    profession; one would think it were Mistress Overdone's own
    house, for here be many of her old customers. First, here's young
    Master Rash; he's in for a commodity of brown paper and old
    ginger, nine score and seventeen pounds, of which he made five
    marks ready money. Marry, then ginger was not much in request,
    for the old women were all dead. Then is there here one Master
    Caper, at the suit of Master Threepile the mercer, for some four
    suits of peach-colour'd satin, which now peaches him a beggar.
    Then have we here young Dizy, and young Master Deepvow, and
    Master Copperspur, and Master Starvelackey, the rapier and dagger
    man, and young Dropheir that kill'd lusty Pudding, and Master
    Forthlight the tilter, and brave Master Shootie the great
    traveller, and wild Halfcan that stabb'd Pots, and, I think,
    forty more- all great doers in our trade, and are now 'for the
    Lord's sake.'

                            Enter ABHORSON

  ABHORSON. Sirrah, bring Barnardine hither.
  POMPEY. Master Barnardine! You must rise and be hang'd, Master
    Barnardine!
  ABHORSON. What ho, Barnardine!
  BARNARDINE. [Within] A pox o' your throats! Who makes that noise
    there? What are you?
  POMPEY. Your friends, sir; the hangman. You must be so good, sir,
    to rise and be put to death.
  BARNARDINE. [ Within ] Away, you rogue, away; I am sleepy.
  ABHORSON. Tell him he must awake, and that quickly too.
  POMPEY. Pray, Master Barnardine, awake till you are executed, and
    sleep afterwards.
  ABHORSON. Go in to him, and fetch him out.
  POMPEY. He is coming, sir, he is coming; I hear his straw rustle.

                             Enter BARNARDINE

  ABHORSON. Is the axe upon the block, sirrah?
  POMPEY. Very ready, sir.
  BARNARDINE. How now, Abhorson, what's the news with you?
  ABHORSON. Truly, sir, I would desire you to clap into your prayers;
    for, look you, the warrant's come.
  BARNARDINE. You rogue, I have been drinking all night; I am not
    fitted for't.
  POMPEY. O, the better, sir! For he that drinks all night and is
    hanged betimes in the morning may sleep the sounder all the next
    day.

                  Enter DUKE, disguised as before

  ABHORSON. Look you, sir, here comes your ghostly father.
    Do we jest now, think you?
  DUKE. Sir, induced by my charity, and hearing how hastily you are
    to depart, I am come to advise you, comfort you, and pray with
    you.
  BARNARDINE. Friar, not I; I have been drinking hard all night, and
    I will have more time to prepare me, or they shall beat out my
    brains with billets. I will not consent to die this day, that's
    certain.
  DUKE. O, Sir, you must; and therefore I beseech you
    Look forward on the journey you shall go.
  BARNARDINE. I swear I will not die to-day for any man's persuasion.
  DUKE. But hear you-
  BARNARDINE. Not a word; if you have anything to say to me, come to
    my ward; for thence will not I to-day.                  Exit
  DUKE. Unfit to live or die. O gravel heart!
    After him, fellows; bring him to the block.
                                      Exeunt ABHORSON and POMPEY

                            Enter PROVOST

  PROVOST. Now, sir, how do you find the prisoner?
  DUKE. A creature unprepar'd, unmeet for death;
    And to transport him in the mind he is
    Were damnable.
  PROVOST. Here in the prison, father,
    There died this morning of a cruel fever
    One Ragozine, a most notorious pirate,
    A man of Claudio's years; his beard and head
    Just of his colour. What if we do omit
    This reprobate till he were well inclin'd,
    And satisfy the deputy with the visage
    Of Ragozine, more like to Claudio?
  DUKE. O, 'tis an accident that heaven provides!
    Dispatch it presently; the hour draws on
    Prefix'd by Angelo. See this be done,
    And sent according to command; whiles I
    Persuade this rude wretch willingly to die.
  PROVOST. This shall be done, good father, presently.
    But Barnardine must die this afternoon;
    And how shall we continue Claudio,
    To save me from the danger that might come
    If he were known alive?
  DUKE. Let this be done:
    Put them in secret holds, both Barnardine and Claudio.
    Ere twice the sun hath made his journal greeting
    To the under generation, you shall find
    Your safety manifested.
  PROVOST. I am your free dependant.
  DUKE. Quick, dispatch, and send the head to Angelo.
                                                    Exit PROVOST
    Now will I write letters to Angelo-
    The Provost, he shall bear them- whose contents
    Shall witness to him I am near at home,
    And that, by great injunctions, I am bound
    To enter publicly. Him I'll desire
    To meet me at the consecrated fount,
    A league below the city; and from thence,
    By cold gradation and well-balanc'd form.
    We shall proceed with Angelo.

                         Re-enter PROVOST

  PROVOST. Here is the head; I'll carry it myself.
  DUKE. Convenient is it. Make a swift return;
    For I would commune with you of such things
    That want no ear but yours.
  PROVOST. I'll make all speed.                             Exit
  ISABELLA. [ Within ] Peace, ho, be here!
  DUKE. The tongue of Isabel. She's come to know
    If yet her brother's pardon be come hither;
    But I will keep her ignorant of her good,
    To make her heavenly comforts of despair
    When it is least expected.

                           Enter ISABELLA

  ISABELLA. Ho, by your leave!
  DUKE. Good morning to you, fair and gracious daughter.
  ISABELLA. The better, given me by so holy a man.
    Hath yet the deputy sent my brother's pardon?
  DUKE. He hath releas'd him, Isabel, from the world.
    His head is off and sent to Angelo.
  ISABELLA. Nay, but it is not so.
  DUKE. It is no other.
    Show your wisdom, daughter, in your close patience,
  ISABELLA. O, I will to him and pluck out his eyes!
  DUKE. You shall not be admitted to his sight.
  ISABELLA. Unhappy Claudio! Wretched Isabel!
    Injurious world! Most damned Angelo!
  DUKE. This nor hurts him nor profits you a jot;
    Forbear it, therefore; give your cause to heaven.
    Mark what I say, which you shall find
    By every syllable a faithful verity.
    The Duke comes home to-morrow. Nay, dry your eyes.
    One of our covent, and his confessor,
    Gives me this instance. Already he hath carried
    Notice to Escalus and Angelo,
    Who do prepare to meet him at the gates,
    There to give up their pow'r. If you can, pace your wisdom
    In that good path that I would wish it go,
    And you shall have your bosom on this wretch,
    Grace of the Duke, revenges to your heart,
    And general honour.
  ISABELLA. I am directed by you.
  DUKE. This letter, then, to Friar Peter give;
    'Tis that he sent me of the Duke's return.
    Say, by this token, I desire his company
    At Mariana's house to-night. Her cause and yours
    I'll perfect him withal; and he shall bring you
    Before the Duke; and to the head of Angelo
    Accuse him home and home. For my poor self,
    I am combined by a sacred vow,
    And shall be absent. Wend you with this letter.
    Command these fretting waters from your eyes
    With a light heart; trust not my holy order,
    If I pervert your course. Who's here?

                           Enter LUCIO

  LUCIO. Good even. Friar, where's the Provost?
  DUKE. Not within, sir.
  LUCIO. O pretty Isabella, I am pale at mine heart to see thine eyes
    so red. Thou must be patient. I am fain to dine and sup with
    water and bran; I dare not for my head fill my belly; one
    fruitful meal would set me to't. But they say the Duke will be
    here to-morrow. By my troth, Isabel, I lov'd thy brother. If the
    old fantastical Duke of dark corners had been at home, he had
    lived.                                         Exit ISABELLA
  DUKE. Sir, the Duke is marvellous little beholding to your reports;
    but the best is, he lives not in them.
  LUCIO. Friar, thou knowest not the Duke so well as I do; he's a
    better woodman than thou tak'st him for.
  DUKE. Well, you'll answer this one day. Fare ye well.
  LUCIO. Nay, tarry; I'll go along with thee; I can tell thee pretty
    tales of the Duke.
  DUKE. You have told me too many of him already, sir, if they be
    true; if not true, none were enough.
  LUCIO. I was once before him for getting a wench with child.
  DUKE. Did you such a thing?
  LUCIO. Yes, marry, did I; but I was fain to forswear it: they would
    else have married me to the rotten medlar.
  DUKE. Sir, your company is fairer than honest. Rest you well.
  LUCIO. By my troth, I'll go with thee to the lane's end. If bawdy
    talk offend you, we'll have very little of it. Nay, friar, I am a
    kind of burr; I shall stick.                          Exeunt




SCENE IV.
ANGELO'S house

Enter ANGELO and ESCALUS

  ESCALUS. Every letter he hath writ hath disvouch'd other.
  ANGELO. In most uneven and distracted manner. His actions show much
    like to madness; pray heaven his wisdom be not tainted! And why
    meet him at the gates, and redeliver our authorities there?
  ESCALUS. I guess not.
  ANGELO. And why should we proclaim it in an hour before his
    ent'ring that, if any crave redress of injustice, they should
    exhibit their petitions in the street?
  ESCALUS. He shows his reason for that: to have a dispatch of
     complaints; and to deliver us from devices hereafter, which
    shall then have no power to stand against us.
  ANGELO. Well, I beseech you, let it be proclaim'd;
    Betimes i' th' morn I'll call you at your house;
    Give notice to such men of sort and suit
    As are to meet him.
  ESCALUS. I shall, sir; fare you well.
  ANGELO. Good night.                               Exit ESCALUS
    This deed unshapes me quite, makes me unpregnant
    And dull to all proceedings. A deflow'red maid!
    And by an eminent body that enforc'd
    The law against it! But that her tender shame
    Will not proclaim against her maiden loss,
    How might she tongue me! Yet reason dares her no;
    For my authority bears a so credent bulk
    That no particular scandal once can touch
    But it confounds the breather. He should have liv'd,
    Save that his riotous youth, with dangerous sense,
    Might in the times to come have ta'en revenge,
    By so receiving a dishonour'd life
    With ransom of such shame. Would yet he had liv'd!
    Alack, when once our grace we have forgot,
    Nothing goes right; we would, and we would not.         Exit




SCENE V.
Fields without the town

Enter DUKE in his own habit, and Friar PETER

  DUKE. These letters at fit time deliver me.   [Giving letters]
    The Provost knows our purpose and our plot.
    The matter being afoot, keep your instruction
    And hold you ever to our special drift;
    Though sometimes you do blench from this to that
    As cause doth minister. Go, call at Flavius' house,
    And tell him where I stay; give the like notice
    To Valentinus, Rowland, and to Crassus,
    And bid them bring the trumpets to the gate;
    But send me Flavius first.
    PETER. It shall be speeded well.                  Exit FRIAR

                             Enter VARRIUS

  DUKE. I thank thee, Varrius; thou hast made good haste.
    Come, we will walk. There's other of our friends
    Will greet us here anon. My gentle Varrius!           Exeunt




SCENE VI.
A street near the city gate

Enter ISABELLA and MARIANA

  ISABELLA. To speak so indirectly I am loath;
    I would say the truth; but to accuse him so,
    That is your part. Yet I am advis'd to do it;
    He says, to veil full purpose.
  MARIANA. Be rul'd by him.
  ISABELLA. Besides, he tells me that, if peradventure
    He speak against me on the adverse side,
    I should not think it strange; for 'tis a physic
    That's bitter to sweet end.
  MARIANA. I would Friar Peter-

                         Enter FRIAR PETER

  ISABELLA. O, peace! the friar is come.
  PETER. Come, I have found you out a stand most fit,
    Where you may have such vantage on the Duke
    He shall not pass you. Twice have the trumpets sounded;
    The generous and gravest citizens
    Have hent the gates, and very near upon
    The Duke is ent'ring; therefore, hence, away.         Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT V. SCENE I.
The city gate

Enter at several doors DUKE, VARRIUS, LORDS; ANGELO, ESCALUS, Lucio,
PROVOST, OFFICERS, and CITIZENS

  DUKE. My very worthy cousin, fairly met!
    Our old and faithful friend, we are glad to see you.
  ANGELO, ESCALUS. Happy return be to your royal Grace!
  DUKE. Many and hearty thankings to you both.
    We have made inquiry of you, and we hear
    Such goodness of your justice that our soul
    Cannot but yield you forth to public thanks,
    Forerunning more requital.
  ANGELO. You make my bonds still greater.
  DUKE. O, your desert speaks loud; and I should wrong it
    To lock it in the wards of covert bosom,
    When it deserves, with characters of brass,
    A forted residence 'gainst the tooth of time
    And razure of oblivion. Give me your hand.
    And let the subject see, to make them know
    That outward courtesies would fain proclaim
    Favours that keep within. Come, Escalus,
    You must walk by us on our other hand,
    And good supporters are you.

                 Enter FRIAR PETER and ISABELLA

  PETER. Now is your time; speak loud, and kneel before him.
  ISABELLA. Justice, O royal Duke! Vail your regard
    Upon a wrong'd- I would fain have said a maid!
    O worthy Prince, dishonour not your eye
    By throwing it on any other object
    Till you have heard me in my true complaint,
    And given me justice, justice, justice, justice.
  DUKE. Relate your wrongs. In what? By whom? Be brief.
    Here is Lord Angelo shall give you justice;
    Reveal yourself to him.
  ISABELLA. O worthy Duke,
    You bid me seek redemption of the devil!
    Hear me yourself; for that which I must speak
    Must either punish me, not being believ'd,
    Or wring redress from you. Hear me, O, hear me, here!
  ANGELO. My lord, her wits, I fear me, are not firm;
    She hath been a suitor to me for her brother,
    Cut off by course of justice-
  ISABELLA. By course of justice!
  ANGELO. And she will speak most bitterly and strange.
  ISABELLA. Most strange, but yet most truly, will I speak.
    That Angelo's forsworn, is it not strange?
    That Angelo's a murderer, is't not strange?
    That Angelo is an adulterous thief,
    An hypocrite, a virgin-violator,
    Is it not strange and strange?
  DUKE. Nay, it is ten times strange.
  ISABELLA. It is not truer he is Angelo
    Than this is all as true as it is strange;
    Nay, it is ten times true; for truth is truth
    To th' end of reck'ning.
  DUKE. Away with her. Poor soul,
    She speaks this in th' infirmity of sense.
  ISABELLA. O Prince! I conjure thee, as thou believ'st
    There is another comfort than this world,
    That thou neglect me not with that opinion
    That I am touch'd with madness. Make not impossible
    That which but seems unlike: 'tis not impossible
    But one, the wicked'st caitiff on the ground,
    May seem as shy, as grave, as just, as absolute,
    As Angelo; even so may Angelo,
    In all his dressings, characts, titles, forms,
    Be an arch-villain. Believe it, royal Prince,
    If he be less, he's nothing; but he's more,
    Had I more name for badness.
  DUKE. By mine honesty,
    If she be mad, as I believe no other,
    Her madness hath the oddest frame of sense,
    Such a dependency of thing on thing,
    As e'er I heard in madness.
  ISABELLA. O gracious Duke,
    Harp not on that; nor do not banish reason
    For inequality; but let your reason serve
    To make the truth appear where it seems hid,
    And hide the false seems true.
  DUKE. Many that are not mad
    Have, sure, more lack of reason. What would you say?
  ISABELLA. I am the sister of one Claudio,
    Condemn'd upon the act of fornication
    To lose his head; condemn'd by Angelo.
    I, in probation of a sisterhood,
    Was sent to by my brother; one Lucio
    As then the messenger-
  LUCIO. That's I, an't like your Grace.
    I came to her from Claudio, and desir'd her
    To try her gracious fortune with Lord Angelo
    For her poor brother's pardon.
  ISABELLA. That's he, indeed.
  DUKE. You were not bid to speak.
  LUCIO. No, my good lord;
    Nor wish'd to hold my peace.
  DUKE. I wish you now, then;
    Pray you take note of it; and when you have
    A business for yourself, pray heaven you then
    Be perfect.
  LUCIO. I warrant your honour.
  DUKE. The warrant's for yourself; take heed to't.
  ISABELLA. This gentleman told somewhat of my tale.
  LUCIO. Right.
  DUKE. It may be right; but you are i' the wrong
    To speak before your time. Proceed.
  ISABELLA. I went
    To this pernicious caitiff deputy.
  DUKE. That's somewhat madly spoken.
  ISABELLA. Pardon it;
    The phrase is to the matter.
  DUKE. Mended again. The matter- proceed.
  ISABELLA. In brief- to set the needless process by,
    How I persuaded, how I pray'd, and kneel'd,
    How he refell'd me, and how I replied,
    For this was of much length- the vile conclusion
    I now begin with grief and shame to utter:
    He would not, but by gift of my chaste body
    To his concupiscible intemperate lust,
    Release my brother; and, after much debatement,
    My sisterly remorse confutes mine honour,
    And I did yield to him. But the next morn betimes,
    His purpose surfeiting, he sends a warrant
    For my poor brother's head.
  DUKE. This is most likely!
  ISABELLA. O that it were as like as it is true!
  DUKE. By heaven, fond wretch, thou know'st not what thou speak'st,
    Or else thou art suborn'd against his honour
    In hateful practice. First, his integrity
    Stands without blemish; next, it imports no reason
    That with such vehemency he should pursue
    Faults proper to himself. If he had so offended,
    He would have weigh'd thy brother by himself,
    And not have cut him off. Some one hath set you on;
    Confess the truth, and say by whose advice
    Thou cam'st here to complain.
  ISABELLA. And is this all?
    Then, O you blessed ministers above,
    Keep me in patience; and, with ripened time,
    Unfold the evil which is here wrapt up
    In countenance! Heaven shield your Grace from woe,
    As I, thus wrong'd, hence unbelieved go!
  DUKE. I know you'd fain be gone. An officer!
    To prison with her! Shall we thus permit
    A blasting and a scandalous breath to fall
    On him so near us? This needs must be a practice.
    Who knew of your intent and coming hither?
  ISABELLA. One that I would were here, Friar Lodowick.
  DUKE. A ghostly father, belike. Who knows that Lodowick?
  LUCIO. My lord, I know him; 'tis a meddling friar.
    I do not like the man; had he been lay, my lord,
    For certain words he spake against your Grace
    In your retirement, I had swing'd him soundly.
  DUKE. Words against me? This's a good friar, belike!
    And to set on this wretched woman here
    Against our substitute! Let this friar be found.
  LUCIO. But yesternight, my lord, she and that friar,
    I saw them at the prison; a saucy friar,
    A very scurvy fellow.
  PETER. Blessed be your royal Grace!
    I have stood by, my lord, and I have heard
    Your royal ear abus'd. First, hath this woman
    Most wrongfully accus'd your substitute;
    Who is as free from touch or soil with her
    As she from one ungot.
  DUKE. We did believe no less.
    Know you that Friar Lodowick that she speaks of?
  PETER. I know him for a man divine and holy;
    Not scurvy, nor a temporary meddler,
    As he's reported by this gentleman;
    And, on my trust, a man that never yet
    Did, as he vouches, misreport your Grace.
  LUCIO. My lord, most villainously; believe it.
  PETER. Well, he in time may come to clear himself;
    But at this instant he is sick, my lord,
    Of a strange fever. Upon his mere request-
    Being come to knowledge that there was complaint
    Intended 'gainst Lord Angelo- came I hither
    To speak, as from his mouth, what he doth know
    Is true and false; and what he, with his oath
    And all probation, will make up full clear,
    Whensoever he's convented. First, for this woman-
    To justify this worthy nobleman,
    So vulgarly and personally accus'd-
    Her shall you hear disproved to her eyes,
    Till she herself confess it.
  DUKE. Good friar, let's hear it.         Exit ISABELLA guarded
    Do you not smile at this, Lord Angelo?
    O heaven, the vanity of wretched fools!
    Give us some seats. Come, cousin Angelo;
    In this I'll be impartial; be you judge
    Of your own cause.

                     Enter MARIANA veiled

    Is this the witness, friar?
  FIRST let her show her face, and after speak.
  MARIANA. Pardon, my lord; I will not show my face
    Until my husband bid me.
  DUKE. What, are you married?
  MARIANA. No, my lord.
  DUKE. Are you a maid?
  MARIANA. No, my lord.
  DUKE. A widow, then?
  MARIANA. Neither, my lord.
  DUKE. Why, you are nothing then; neither maid, widow, nor wife.
  LUCIO. My lord, she may be a punk; for many of them are neither
    maid, widow, nor wife.
  DUKE. Silence that fellow. I would he had some cause
    To prattle for himself.
  LUCIO. Well, my lord.
  MARIANA. My lord, I do confess I ne'er was married,
    And I confess, besides, I am no maid.
    I have known my husband; yet my husband
    Knows not that ever he knew me.
  LUCIO. He was drunk, then, my lord; it can be no better.
  DUKE. For the benefit of silence, would thou wert so too!
  LUCIO. Well, my lord.
  DUKE. This is no witness for Lord Angelo.
  MARIANA. Now I come to't, my lord:
    She that accuses him of fornication,
    In self-same manner doth accuse my husband;
    And charges him, my lord, with such a time
    When I'll depose I had him in mine arms,
    With all th' effect of love.
  ANGELO. Charges she moe than me?
  MARIANA. Not that I know.
  DUKE. No? You say your husband.
  MARIANA. Why, just, my lord, and that is Angelo,
    Who thinks he knows that he ne'er knew my body,
    But knows he thinks that he knows Isabel's.
  ANGELO. This is a strange abuse. Let's see thy face.
  MARIANA. My husband bids me; now I will unmask.
                                                     [Unveiling]
    This is that face, thou cruel Angelo,
    Which once thou swor'st was worth the looking on;
    This is the hand which, with a vow'd contract,
    Was fast belock'd in thine; this is the body
    That took away the match from Isabel,
    And did supply thee at thy garden-house
    In her imagin'd person.
  DUKE. Know you this woman?
  LUCIO. Carnally, she says.
  DUKE. Sirrah, no more.
  LUCIO. Enough, my lord.
  ANGELO. My lord, I must confess I know this woman;
    And five years since there was some speech of marriage
    Betwixt myself and her; which was broke off,
    Partly for that her promised proportions
    Came short of composition; but in chief
    For that her reputation was disvalued
    In levity. Since which time of five years
    I never spake with her, saw her, nor heard from her,
    Upon my faith and honour.
  MARIANA. Noble Prince,
    As there comes light from heaven and words from breath,
    As there is sense in truth and truth in virtue,
    I am affianc'd this man's wife as strongly
    As words could make up vows. And, my good lord,
    But Tuesday night last gone, in's garden-house,
    He knew me as a wife. As this is true,
    Let me in safety raise me from my knees,
    Or else for ever be confixed here,
    A marble monument!
  ANGELO. I did but smile till now.
    Now, good my lord, give me the scope of justice;
    My patience here is touch'd. I do perceive
    These poor informal women are no more
    But instruments of some more mightier member
    That sets them on. Let me have way, my lord,
    To find this practice out.
  DUKE. Ay, with my heart;
    And punish them to your height of pleasure.
    Thou foolish friar, and thou pernicious woman,
    Compact with her that's gone, think'st thou thy oaths,
    Though they would swear down each particular saint,
    Were testimonies against his worth and credit,
    That's seal'd in approbation? You, Lord Escalus,
    Sit with my cousin; lend him your kind pains
    To find out this abuse, whence 'tis deriv'd.
    There is another friar that set them on;
    Let him be sent for.
  PETER. Would lie were here, my lord! For he indeed
    Hath set the women on to this complaint.
    Your provost knows the place where he abides,
    And he may fetch him.
  DUKE. Go, do it instantly.                        Exit PROVOST
    And you, my noble and well-warranted cousin,
    Whom it concerns to hear this matter forth,
    Do with your injuries as seems you best
    In any chastisement. I for a while will leave you;
    But stir not you till you have well determin'd
    Upon these slanderers.
  ESCALUS. My lord, we'll do it throughly.             Exit DUKE
    Signior Lucio, did not you say you knew that Friar Lodowick to be
    a dishonest person?
  LUCIO. 'Cucullus non facit monachum': honest in nothing but in his
    clothes; and one that hath spoke most villainous speeches of the
    Duke.
  ESCALUS. We shall entreat you to abide here till he come and
    enforce them against him. We shall find this friar a notable
    fellow.
  LUCIO. As any in Vienna, on my word.
  ESCALUS. Call that same Isabel here once again; I would speak with
    her. [Exit an ATTENDANT] Pray you, my lord, give me leave to
    question; you shall see how I'll handle her.
  LUCIO. Not better than he, by her own report.
  ESCALUS. Say you?
  LUCIO. Marry, sir, I think, if you handled her privately, she would
    sooner confess; perchance, publicly, she'll be asham'd.

       Re-enter OFFICERS with ISABELLA; and PROVOST with the
                    DUKE in his friar's habit

  ESCALUS. I will go darkly to work with her.
  LUCIO. That's the way; for women are light at midnight.
  ESCALUS. Come on, mistress; here's a gentlewoman denies all that
    you have said.
  LUCIO. My lord, here comes the rascal I spoke of, here with the
    Provost.
  ESCALUS. In very good time. Speak not you to him till we call upon
    you.
  LUCIO. Mum.
  ESCALUS. Come, sir; did you set these women on to slander Lord
    Angelo? They have confess'd you did.
  DUKE. 'Tis false.
  ESCALUS. How! Know you where you are?
  DUKE. Respect to your great place! and let the devil
    Be sometime honour'd for his burning throne!
    Where is the Duke? 'Tis he should hear me speak.
  ESCALUS. The Duke's in us; and we will hear you speak;
    Look you speak justly.
  DUKE. Boldly, at least. But, O, poor souls,
    Come you to seek the lamb here of the fox,
    Good night to your redress! Is the Duke gone?
    Then is your cause gone too. The Duke's unjust
    Thus to retort your manifest appeal,
    And put your trial in the villain's mouth
    Which here you come to accuse.
  LUCIO. This is the rascal; this is he I spoke of.
  ESCALUS. Why, thou unreverend and unhallowed friar,
    Is't not enough thou hast suborn'd these women
    To accuse this worthy man, but, in foul mouth,
    And in the witness of his proper ear,
    To call him villain; and then to glance from him
    To th' Duke himself, to tax him with injustice?
    Take him hence; to th' rack with him! We'll touze you
    Joint by joint, but we will know his purpose.
    What, 'unjust'!
  DUKE. Be not so hot; the Duke
    Dare no more stretch this finger of mine than he
    Dare rack his own; his subject am I not,
    Nor here provincial. My business in this state
    Made me a looker-on here in Vienna,
    Where I have seen corruption boil and bubble
    Till it o'errun the stew: laws for all faults,
    But faults so countenanc'd that the strong statutes
    Stand like the forfeits in a barber's shop,
    As much in mock as mark.
  ESCALUS. Slander to th' state! Away with him to prison!
  ANGELO. What can you vouch against him, Signior Lucio?
    Is this the man that you did tell us of?
  LUCIO. 'Tis he, my lord. Come hither, good-man bald-pate.
    Do you know me?
  DUKE. I remember you, sir, by the sound of your voice. I met you at
    the prison, in the absence of the Duke.
  LUCIO. O did you so? And do you remember what you said of the Duke?
  DUKE. Most notedly, sir.
  LUCIO. Do you so, sir? And was the Duke a fleshmonger, a fool, and
    a coward, as you then reported him to be?
  DUKE. You must, sir, change persons with me ere you make that my
    report; you, indeed, spoke so of him; and much more, much worse.
  LUCIO. O thou damnable fellow! Did not I pluck thee by the nose for
    thy speeches?
  DUKE. I protest I love the Duke as I love myself.
  ANGELO. Hark how the villain would close now, after his treasonable
    abuses!
  ESCALUS. Such a fellow is not to be talk'd withal. Away with him to
    prison! Where is the Provost? Away with him to prison! Lay bolts
    enough upon him; let him speak no more. Away with those giglets
    too, and with the other confederate companion!
                            [The PROVOST lays bands on the DUKE]
  DUKE. Stay, sir; stay awhile.
  ANGELO. What, resists he? Help him, Lucio.
  LUCIO. Come, sir; come, sir; come, sir; foh, sir! Why, you
    bald-pated lying rascal, you must be hooded, must you? Show your
    knave's visage, with a pox to you! Show your sheep-biting face,
    and be hang'd an hour! Will't not off?
             [Pulls off the FRIAR'S bood and discovers the DUKE]
  DUKE. Thou art the first knave that e'er mad'st a duke.
    First, Provost, let me bail these gentle three.
    [To Lucio] Sneak not away, sir, for the friar and you
    Must have a word anon. Lay hold on him.
  LUCIO. This may prove worse than hanging.
  DUKE. [To ESCALUS] What you have spoke I pardon; sit you down.
    We'll borrow place of him. [To ANGELO] Sir, by your leave.
    Hast thou or word, or wit, or impudence,
    That yet can do thee office? If thou hast,
    Rely upon it till my tale be heard,
    And hold no longer out.
  ANGELO. O my dread lord,
    I should be guiltier than my guiltiness,
    To think I can be undiscernible,
    When I perceive your Grace, like pow'r divine,
    Hath look'd upon my passes. Then, good Prince,
    No longer session hold upon my shame,
    But let my trial be mine own confession;
    Immediate sentence then, and sequent death,
    Is all the grace I beg.
  DUKE. Come hither, Mariana.
    Say, wast thou e'er contracted to this woman?
  ANGELO. I was, my lord.
  DUKE. Go, take her hence and marry her instantly.
    Do you the office, friar; which consummate,
    Return him here again. Go with him, Provost.
                Exeunt ANGELO, MARIANA, FRIAR PETER, and PROVOST
  ESCALUS. My lord, I am more amaz'd at his dishonour
    Than at the strangeness of it.
  DUKE. Come hither, Isabel.
    Your friar is now your prince. As I was then
    Advertising and holy to your business,
    Not changing heart with habit, I am still
    Attorney'd at your service.
  ISABELLA. O, give me pardon,
    That I, your vassal have employ'd and pain'd
    Your unknown sovereignty.
  DUKE. You are pardon'd, Isabel.
    And now, dear maid, be you as free to us.
    Your brother's death, I know, sits at your heart;
    And you may marvel why I obscur'd myself,
    Labouring to save his life, and would not rather
    Make rash remonstrance of my hidden pow'r
    Than let him so be lost. O most kind maid,
    It was the swift celerity of his death,
    Which I did think with slower foot came on,
    That brain'd my purpose. But peace be with him!
    That life is better life, past fearing death,
    Than that which lives to fear. Make it your comfort,
    So happy is your brother.
  ISABELLA. I do, my lord.

       Re-enter ANGELO, MARIANA, FRIAR PETER, and PROVOST

  DUKE. For this new-married man approaching here,
    Whose salt imagination yet hath wrong'd
    Your well-defended honour, you must pardon
    For Mariana's sake; but as he adjudg'd your brother-
    Being criminal in double violation
    Of sacred chastity and of promise-breach,
    Thereon dependent, for your brother's life-
    The very mercy of the law cries out
    Most audible, even from his proper tongue,
    'An Angelo for Claudio, death for death!'
    Haste still pays haste, and leisure answers leisure;
    Like doth quit like, and Measure still for Measure.
    Then, Angelo, thy fault's thus manifested,
    Which, though thou wouldst deny, denies thee vantage.
    We do condemn thee to the very block
    Where Claudio stoop'd to death, and with like haste.
    Away with him!
  MARIANA. O my most gracious lord,
    I hope you will not mock me with a husband.
  DUKE. It is your husband mock'd you with a husband.
    Consenting to the safeguard of your honour,
    I thought your marriage fit; else imputation,
    For that he knew you, might reproach your life,
    And choke your good to come. For his possessions,
    Although by confiscation they are ours,
    We do instate and widow you withal
    To buy you a better husband.
  MARIANA. O my dear lord,
    I crave no other, nor no better man.
  DUKE. Never crave him; we are definitive.
  MARIANA. Gentle my liege-                           [Kneeling]
  DUKE. You do but lose your labour.
    Away with him to death! [To LUCIO] Now, sir, to you.
  MARIANA. O my good lord! Sweet Isabel, take my part;
    Lend me your knees, and all my life to come
    I'll lend you all my life to do you service.
  DUKE. Against all sense you do importune her.
    Should she kneel down in mercy of this fact,
    Her brother's ghost his paved bed would break,
    And take her hence in horror.
  MARIANA. Isabel,
    Sweet Isabel, do yet but kneel by me;
    Hold up your hands, say nothing; I'll speak all.
    They say best men moulded out of faults;
    And, for the most, become much more the better
    For being a little bad; so may my husband.
    O Isabel, will you not lend a knee?
  DUKE. He dies for Claudio's death.
  ISABELLA. [Kneeling] Most bounteous sir,
    Look, if it please you, on this man condemn'd,
    As if my brother liv'd. I partly think
    A due sincerity govern'd his deeds
    Till he did look on me; since it is so,
    Let him not die. My brother had but justice,
    In that he did the thing for which he died;
    For Angelo,
    His act did not o'ertake his bad intent,
    And must be buried but as an intent
    That perish'd by the way. Thoughts are no subjects;
    Intents but merely thoughts.
  MARIANA. Merely, my lord.
  DUKE. Your suit's unprofitable; stand up, I say.
    I have bethought me of another fault.
    Provost, how came it Claudio was beheaded
    At an unusual hour?
  PROVOST. It was commanded so.
  DUKE. Had you a special warrant for the deed?
  PROVOST. No, my good lord; it was by private message.
  DUKE. For which I do discharge you of your office;
    Give up your keys.
  PROVOST. Pardon me, noble lord;
    I thought it was a fault, but knew it not;
    Yet did repent me, after more advice;
    For testimony whereof, one in the prison,
    That should by private order else have died,
    I have reserv'd alive.
  DUKE. What's he?
  PROVOST. His name is Barnardine.
  DUKE. I would thou hadst done so by Claudio.
    Go fetch him hither; let me look upon him.      Exit PROVOST
  ESCALUS. I am sorry one so learned and so wise
    As you, Lord Angelo, have still appear'd,
    Should slip so grossly, both in the heat of blood
    And lack of temper'd judgment afterward.
  ANGELO. I am sorry that such sorrow I procure;
    And so deep sticks it in my penitent heart
    That I crave death more willingly than mercy;
    'Tis my deserving, and I do entreat it.

       Re-enter PROVOST, with BARNARDINE, CLAUDIO (muffled)
                            and JULIET

  DUKE. Which is that Barnardine?
  PROVOST. This, my lord.
  DUKE. There was a friar told me of this man.
    Sirrah, thou art said to have a stubborn soul,
    That apprehends no further than this world,
    And squar'st thy life according. Thou'rt condemn'd;
    But, for those earthly faults, I quit them all,
    And pray thee take this mercy to provide
    For better times to come. Friar, advise him;
    I leave him to your hand. What muffl'd fellow's that?
  PROVOST. This is another prisoner that I sav'd,
    Who should have died when Claudio lost his head;
    As like almost to Claudio as himself.    [Unmuffles CLAUDIO]
  DUKE. [To ISABELLA] If he be like your brother, for his sake
    Is he pardon'd; and for your lovely sake,
    Give me your hand and say you will be mine,
    He is my brother too. But fitter time for that.
    By this Lord Angelo perceives he's safe;
    Methinks I see a quick'ning in his eye.
    Well, Angelo, your evil quits you well.
    Look that you love your wife; her worth worth yours.
    I find an apt remission in myself;
    And yet here's one in place I cannot pardon.
    To Lucio] You, sirrah, that knew me for a fool, a coward,
    One all of luxury, an ass, a madman!
    Wherein have I so deserv'd of you
    That you extol me thus?
  LUCIO. Faith, my lord, I spoke it but according to the trick.
    If you will hang me for it, you may; but I had rather it would
    please you I might be whipt.
  DUKE. Whipt first, sir, and hang'd after.
    Proclaim it, Provost, round about the city,
    If any woman wrong'd by this lewd fellow-
    As I have heard him swear himself there's one
    Whom he begot with child, let her appear,
    And he shall marry her. The nuptial finish'd,
    Let him be whipt and hang'd.
  LUCIO. I beseech your Highness, do not marry me to a whore. Your
    Highness said even now I made you a duke; good my lord, do not
    recompense me in making me a cuckold.
  DUKE. Upon mine honour, thou shalt marry her.
    Thy slanders I forgive; and therewithal
    Remit thy other forfeits. Take him to prison;
    And see our pleasure herein executed.
  LUCIO. Marrying a punk, my lord, is pressing to death, whipping,
    and hanging.
  DUKE. Slandering a prince deserves it.
                                      Exeunt OFFICERS with LUCIO
    She, Claudio, that you wrong'd, look you restore.
    Joy to you, Mariana! Love her, Angelo;
    I have confess'd her, and I know her virtue.
    Thanks, good friend Escalus, for thy much goodness;
    There's more behind that is more gratulate.
    Thanks, Provost, for thy care and secrecy;
    We shall employ thee in a worthier place.
    Forgive him, Angelo, that brought you home
    The head of Ragozine for Claudio's:
    Th' offence pardons itself. Dear Isabel,
    I have a motion much imports your good;
    Whereto if you'll a willing ear incline,
    What's mine is yours, and what is yours is mine.
    So, bring us to our palace, where we'll show
    What's yet behind that's meet you all should know.
                                                          Exeunt

THE END



<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>





1597

THE MERCHANT OF VENICE

by William Shakespeare



DRAMATIS PERSONAE

  THE DUKE OF VENICE
  THE PRINCE OF MOROCCO, suitor to Portia
  THE PRINCE OF ARRAGON,    "    "    "
  ANTONIO, a merchant of Venice
  BASSANIO, his friend, suitor to Portia
  SOLANIO,   friend to Antonio and Bassanio
  SALERIO,      "    "    "     "     "
  GRATIANO,     "    "    "     "     "
  LORENZO, in love with Jessica
  SHYLOCK, a rich Jew
  TUBAL, a Jew, his friend
  LAUNCELOT GOBBO, a clown, servant to Shylock
  OLD GOBBO, father to Launcelot
  LEONARDO, servant to Bassanio
  BALTHASAR, servant to Portia
  STEPHANO,     "     "    "

  PORTIA, a rich heiress
  NERISSA, her waiting-maid
  JESSICA, daughter to Shylock

  Magnificoes of Venice, Officers of the Court of Justice,
    Gaoler, Servants, and other Attendants




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



SCENE:
Venice, and PORTIA'S house at Belmont


ACT I. SCENE I.
Venice. A street

Enter ANTONIO, SALERIO, and SOLANIO

  ANTONIO. In sooth, I know not why I am so sad.
    It wearies me; you say it wearies you;
    But how I caught it, found it, or came by it,
    What stuff 'tis made of, whereof it is born,
    I am to learn;
    And such a want-wit sadness makes of me
    That I have much ado to know myself.
  SALERIO. Your mind is tossing on the ocean;
    There where your argosies, with portly sail-
    Like signiors and rich burghers on the flood,
    Or as it were the pageants of the sea-
    Do overpeer the petty traffickers,
    That curtsy to them, do them reverence,
    As they fly by them with their woven wings.
  SOLANIO. Believe me, sir, had I such venture forth,
    The better part of my affections would
    Be with my hopes abroad. I should be still
    Plucking the grass to know where sits the wind,
    Peering in maps for ports, and piers, and roads;
    And every object that might make me fear
    Misfortune to my ventures, out of doubt,
    Would make me sad.
  SALERIO. My wind, cooling my broth,
    Would blow me to an ague when I thought
    What harm a wind too great might do at sea.
    I should not see the sandy hour-glass run
    But I should think of shallows and of flats,
    And see my wealthy Andrew dock'd in sand,
    Vailing her high top lower than her ribs
    To kiss her burial. Should I go to church
    And see the holy edifice of stone,
    And not bethink me straight of dangerous rocks,
    Which, touching but my gentle vessel's side,
    Would scatter all her spices on the stream,
    Enrobe the roaring waters with my silks,
    And, in a word, but even now worth this,
    And now worth nothing? Shall I have the thought
    To think on this, and shall I lack the thought
    That such a thing bechanc'd would make me sad?
    But tell not me; I know Antonio
    Is sad to think upon his merchandise.
  ANTONIO. Believe me, no; I thank my fortune for it,
    My ventures are not in one bottom trusted,
    Nor to one place; nor is my whole estate
    Upon the fortune of this present year;
    Therefore my merchandise makes me not sad.
  SOLANIO. Why then you are in love.
  ANTONIO. Fie, fie!
  SOLANIO. Not in love neither? Then let us say you are sad
    Because you are not merry; and 'twere as easy
    For you to laugh and leap and say you are merry,
    Because you are not sad. Now, by two-headed Janus,
    Nature hath fram'd strange fellows in her time:
    Some that will evermore peep through their eyes,
    And laugh like parrots at a bag-piper;
    And other of such vinegar aspect
    That they'll not show their teeth in way of smile
    Though Nestor swear the jest be laughable.

               Enter BASSANIO, LORENZO, and GRATIANO

    Here comes Bassanio, your most noble kinsman,
    Gratiano and Lorenzo. Fare ye well;
    We leave you now with better company.
  SALERIO. I would have stay'd till I had made you merry,
    If worthier friends had not prevented me.
  ANTONIO. Your worth is very dear in my regard.
    I take it your own business calls on you,
    And you embrace th' occasion to depart.
  SALERIO. Good morrow, my good lords.
  BASSANIO. Good signiors both, when shall we laugh? Say when.
    You grow exceeding strange; must it be so?
  SALERIO. We'll make our leisures to attend on yours.
                                      Exeunt SALERIO and SOLANIO
  LORENZO. My Lord Bassanio, since you have found Antonio,
    We two will leave you; but at dinner-time,
    I pray you, have in mind where we must meet.
  BASSANIO. I will not fail you.
  GRATIANO. You look not well, Signior Antonio;
    You have too much respect upon the world;
    They lose it that do buy it with much care.
    Believe me, you are marvellously chang'd.
  ANTONIO. I hold the world but as the world, Gratiano-
    A stage, where every man must play a part,
    And mine a sad one.
  GRATIANO. Let me play the fool.
    With mirth and laughter let old wrinkles come;
    And let my liver rather heat with wine
    Than my heart cool with mortifying groans.
    Why should a man whose blood is warm within
    Sit like his grandsire cut in alabaster,
    Sleep when he wakes, and creep into the jaundice
    By being peevish? I tell thee what, Antonio-
    I love thee, and 'tis my love that speaks-
    There are a sort of men whose visages
    Do cream and mantle like a standing pond,
    And do a wilful stillness entertain,
    With purpose to be dress'd in an opinion
    Of wisdom, gravity, profound conceit;
    As who should say 'I am Sir Oracle,
    And when I ope my lips let no dog bark.'
    O my Antonio, I do know of these
    That therefore only are reputed wise
    For saying nothing; when, I am very sure,
    If they should speak, would almost damn those ears
    Which, hearing them, would call their brothers fools.
    I'll tell thee more of this another time.
    But fish not with this melancholy bait
    For this fool gudgeon, this opinion.
    Come, good Lorenzo. Fare ye well awhile;
    I'll end my exhortation after dinner.
  LORENZO. Well, we will leave you then till dinner-time.
    I must be one of these same dumb wise men,
    For Gratiano never lets me speak.
  GRATIANO. Well, keep me company but two years moe,
    Thou shalt not know the sound of thine own tongue.
  ANTONIO. Fare you well; I'll grow a talker for this gear.
  GRATIANO. Thanks, i' faith, for silence is only commendable
    In a neat's tongue dried, and a maid not vendible.
                                     Exeunt GRATIANO and LORENZO
  ANTONIO. Is that anything now?
  BASSANIO. Gratiano speaks an infinite deal of nothing, more than
    any man in all Venice. His reasons are as two grains of wheat hid
    in, two bushels of chaff: you shall seek all day ere you find
    them, and when you have them they are not worth the search.
  ANTONIO. Well; tell me now what lady is the same
    To whom you swore a secret pilgrimage,
    That you to-day promis'd to tell me of?
  BASSANIO. 'Tis not unknown to you, Antonio,
    How much I have disabled mine estate
    By something showing a more swelling port
    Than my faint means would grant continuance;
    Nor do I now make moan to be abridg'd
    From such a noble rate; but my chief care
    Is to come fairly off from the great debts
    Wherein my time, something too prodigal,
    Hath left me gag'd. To you, Antonio,
    I owe the most, in money and in love;
    And from your love I have a warranty
    To unburden all my plots and purposes
    How to get clear of all the debts I owe.
  ANTONIO. I pray you, good Bassanio, let me know it;
    And if it stand, as you yourself still do,
    Within the eye of honour, be assur'd
    My purse, my person, my extremest means,
    Lie all unlock'd to your occasions.
  BASSANIO. In my school-days, when I had lost one shaft,
    I shot his fellow of the self-same flight
    The self-same way, with more advised watch,
    To find the other forth; and by adventuring both
    I oft found both. I urge this childhood proof,
    Because what follows is pure innocence.
    I owe you much; and, like a wilful youth,
    That which I owe is lost; but if you please
    To shoot another arrow that self way
    Which you did shoot the first, I do not doubt,
    As I will watch the aim, or to find both,
    Or bring your latter hazard back again
    And thankfully rest debtor for the first.
  ANTONIO. You know me well, and herein spend but time
    To wind about my love with circumstance;
    And out of doubt you do me now more wrong
    In making question of my uttermost
    Than if you had made waste of all I have.
    Then do but say to me what I should do
    That in your knowledge may by me be done,
    And I am prest unto it; therefore, speak.
  BASSANIO. In Belmont is a lady richly left,
    And she is fair and, fairer than that word,
    Of wondrous virtues. Sometimes from her eyes
    I did receive fair speechless messages.
    Her name is Portia- nothing undervalu'd
    To Cato's daughter, Brutus' Portia.
    Nor is the wide world ignorant of her worth;
    For the four winds blow in from every coast
    Renowned suitors, and her sunny locks
    Hang on her temples like a golden fleece,
    Which makes her seat of Belmont Colchos' strond,
    And many Jasons come in quest of her.
    O my Antonio, had I but the means
    To hold a rival place with one of them,
    I have a mind presages me such thrift
    That I should questionless be fortunate.
  ANTONIO. Thou know'st that all my fortunes are at sea;
    Neither have I money nor commodity
    To raise a present sum; therefore go forth,
    Try what my credit can in Venice do;
    That shall be rack'd, even to the uttermost,
    To furnish thee to Belmont to fair Portia.
    Go presently inquire, and so will I,
    Where money is; and I no question make
    To have it of my trust or for my sake.                Exeunt





SCENE II.
Belmont. PORTIA'S house

Enter PORTIA with her waiting-woman, NERISSA

  PORTIA. By my troth, Nerissa, my little body is aweary of this
    great world.
  NERISSA. You would be, sweet madam, if your miseries were in the
    same abundance as your good fortunes are; and yet, for aught I
    see, they are as sick that surfeit with too much as they that
    starve with nothing. It is no mean happiness, therefore, to be
    seated in the mean: superfluity come sooner by white hairs, but
    competency lives longer.
  PORTIA. Good sentences, and well pronounc'd.
  NERISSA. They would be better, if well followed.
  PORTIA. If to do were as easy as to know what were good to do,
    chapels had been churches, and poor men's cottages princes'
    palaces. It is a good divine that follows his own instructions; I
    can easier teach twenty what were good to be done than to be one
    of the twenty to follow mine own teaching. The brain may devise
    laws for the blood, but a hot temper leaps o'er a cold decree;
    such a hare is madness the youth, to skip o'er the meshes of good
    counsel the cripple. But this reasoning is not in the fashion to
    choose me a husband. O me, the word 'choose'! I may neither
    choose who I would nor refuse who I dislike; so is the will of a
    living daughter curb'd by the will of a dead father. Is it not
    hard, Nerissa, that I cannot choose one, nor refuse none?
  NERISSA. Your father was ever virtuous, and holy men at their death
    have good inspirations; therefore the lott'ry that he hath
    devised in these three chests, of gold, silver, and lead- whereof
    who chooses his meaning chooses you- will no doubt never be
    chosen by any rightly but one who you shall rightly love. But
    what warmth is there in your affection towards any of these
    princely suitors that are already come?
  PORTIA. I pray thee over-name them; and as thou namest them, I will
    describe them; and according to my description, level at my
    affection.
  NERISSA. First, there is the Neapolitan prince.
  PORTIA. Ay, that's a colt indeed, for he doth nothing but talk of
    his horse; and he makes it a great appropriation to his own good
    parts that he can shoe him himself; I am much afear'd my lady his
    mother play'd false with a smith.
  NERISSA. Then is there the County Palatine.
  PORTIA. He doth nothing but frown, as who should say 'An you will
    not have me, choose.' He hears merry tales and smiles not. I fear
    he will prove the weeping philosopher when he grows old, being so
    full of unmannerly sadness in his youth. I had rather be married
    to a death's-head with a bone in his mouth than to either of
    these. God defend me from these two!
  NERISSA. How say you by the French lord, Monsieur Le Bon?
  PORTIA. God made him, and therefore let him pass for a man. In
    truth, I know it is a sin to be a mocker, but he- why, he hath a
    horse better than the Neapolitan's, a better bad habit of
    frowning than the Count Palatine; he is every man in no man. If a
    throstle sing he falls straight a-cap'ring; he will fence with
    his own shadow; if I should marry him, I should marry twenty
    husbands. If he would despise me, I would forgive him; for if he
    love me to madness, I shall never requite him.
  NERISSA. What say you then to Falconbridge, the young baron of
    England?
  PORTIA. You know I say nothing to him, for he understands not me,
    nor I him: he hath neither Latin, French, nor Italian, and you
    will come into the court and swear that I have a poor pennyworth
    in the English. He is a proper man's picture; but alas, who can
    converse with a dumb-show? How oddly he is suited! I think he
    bought his doublet in Italy, his round hose in France, his bonnet
    in Germany, and his behaviour everywhere.
  NERISSA. What think you of the Scottish lord, his neighbour?
  PORTIA. That he hath a neighbourly charity in him, for he borrowed
    a box of the ear of the Englishman, and swore he would pay him
    again when he was able; I think the Frenchman became his surety,
    and seal'd under for another.
  NERISSA. How like you the young German, the Duke of Saxony's
    nephew?
  PORTIA. Very vilely in the morning when he is sober; and most
    vilely in the afternoon when he is drunk. When he is best, he is
    a little worse than a man, and when he is worst, he is little
    better than a beast. An the worst fall that ever fell, I hope I
    shall make shift to go without him.
  NERISSA. If he should offer to choose, and choose the right casket,
    you should refuse to perform your father's will, if you should
    refuse to accept him.
  PORTIA. Therefore, for fear of the worst, I pray thee set a deep
    glass of Rhenish wine on the contrary casket; for if the devil be
    within and that temptation without, I know he will choose it. I
    will do anything, Nerissa, ere I will be married to a sponge.
  NERISSA. You need not fear, lady, the having any of these lords;
    they have acquainted me with their determinations, which is
    indeed to return to their home, and to trouble you with no more
    suit, unless you may be won by some other sort than your father's
    imposition, depending on the caskets.
  PORTIA. If I live to be as old as Sibylla, I will die as chaste as
    Diana, unless I be obtained by the manner of my father's will. I
    am glad this parcel of wooers are so reasonable; for there is not
    one among them but I dote on his very absence, and I pray God
    grant them a fair departure.
  NERISSA. Do you not remember, lady, in your father's time, a
    Venetian, a scholar and a soldier, that came hither in company of
    the Marquis of Montferrat?
  PORTIA. Yes, yes, it was Bassanio; as I think, so was he call'd.
  NERISSA. True, madam; he, of all the men that ever my foolish eyes
    look'd upon, was the best deserving a fair lady.
  PORTIA. I remember him well, and I remember him worthy of thy
    praise.

                         Enter a SERVINGMAN

    How now! what news?
  SERVINGMAN. The four strangers seek for you, madam, to take their
    leave; and there is a forerunner come from a fifth, the Prince of
    Morocco, who brings word the Prince his master will be here
    to-night.
  PORTIA. If I could bid the fifth welcome with so good heart as I
    can bid the other four farewell, I should be glad of his
    approach; if he have the condition of a saint and the complexion
    of a devil, I had rather he should shrive me than wive me.
    Come, Nerissa. Sirrah, go before.
    Whiles we shut the gate upon one wooer, another knocks at the
      door.                                               Exeunt




SCENE III.
Venice. A public place

Enter BASSANIO With SHYLOCK the Jew

  SHYLOCK. Three thousand ducats- well.
  BASSANIO. Ay, sir, for three months.
  SHYLOCK. For three months- well.
  BASSANIO. For the which, as I told you, Antonio shall be bound.
  SHYLOCK. Antonio shall become bound- well.
  BASSANIO. May you stead me? Will you pleasure me? Shall I know your
    answer?
  SHYLOCK. Three thousand ducats for three months, and Antonio bound.
  BASSANIO. Your answer to that.
  SHYLOCK. Antonio is a good man.
  BASSANIO. Have you heard any imputation to the contrary?
  SHYLOCK. Ho, no, no, no, no; my meaning in saying he is a good man
    is to have you understand me that he is sufficient; yet his means
    are in supposition: he hath an argosy bound to Tripolis, another
    to the Indies; I understand, moreover, upon the Rialto, he hath a
    third at Mexico, a fourth for England- and other ventures he
    hath, squand'red abroad. But ships are but boards, sailors but
    men; there be land-rats and water-rats, water-thieves and
    land-thieves- I mean pirates; and then there is the peril of
    waters, winds, and rocks. The man is, notwithstanding,
    sufficient. Three thousand ducats- I think I may take his bond.
  BASSANIO. Be assur'd you may.
  SHYLOCK. I will be assur'd I may; and, that I may be assured, I
    will bethink me. May I speak with Antonio?
  BASSANIO. If it please you to dine with us.
  SHYLOCK. Yes, to smell pork, to eat of the habitation which your
    prophet, the Nazarite, conjured the devil into! I will buy with
    you, sell with you, talk with you, walk with you, and so
    following; but I will not eat with you, drink with you, nor pray
    with you. What news on the Rialto? Who is he comes here?

                            Enter ANTONIO

  BASSANIO. This is Signior Antonio.
  SHYLOCK.  [Aside]  How like a fawning publican he looks!
    I hate him for he is a Christian;
    But more for that in low simplicity
    He lends out money gratis, and brings down
    The rate of usance here with us in Venice.
    If I can catch him once upon the hip,
    I will feed fat the ancient grudge I bear him.
    He hates our sacred nation; and he rails,
    Even there where merchants most do congregate,
    On me, my bargains, and my well-won thrift,
    Which he calls interest. Cursed be my tribe
    If I forgive him!
  BASSANIO. Shylock, do you hear?
  SHYLOCK. I am debating of my present store,
    And, by the near guess of my memory,
    I cannot instantly raise up the gross
    Of full three thousand ducats. What of that?
    Tubal, a wealthy Hebrew of my tribe,
    Will furnish me. But soft! how many months
    Do you desire?  [To ANTONIO]  Rest you fair, good signior;
    Your worship was the last man in our mouths.
  ANTONIO. Shylock, albeit I neither lend nor borrow
    By taking nor by giving of excess,
    Yet, to supply the ripe wants of my friend,
    I'll break a custom.  [To BASSANIO]  Is he yet possess'd
    How much ye would?
  SHYLOCK. Ay, ay, three thousand ducats.
  ANTONIO. And for three months.
  SHYLOCK. I had forgot- three months; you told me so.
    Well then, your bond; and, let me see- but hear you,
    Methoughts you said you neither lend nor borrow
    Upon advantage.
  ANTONIO. I do never use it.
  SHYLOCK. When Jacob graz'd his uncle Laban's sheep-
    This Jacob from our holy Abram was,
    As his wise mother wrought in his behalf,
    The third possessor; ay, he was the third-
  ANTONIO. And what of him? Did he take interest?
  SHYLOCK. No, not take interest; not, as you would say,
    Directly int'rest; mark what Jacob did:
    When Laban and himself were compromis'd
    That all the eanlings which were streak'd and pied
    Should fall as Jacob's hire, the ewes, being rank,
    In end of autumn turned to the rams;
    And when the work of generation was
    Between these woolly breeders in the act,
    The skilful shepherd pill'd me certain wands,
    And, in the doing of the deed of kind,
    He stuck them up before the fulsome ewes,
    Who, then conceiving, did in eaning time
    Fall parti-colour'd lambs, and those were Jacob's.
    This was a way to thrive, and he was blest;
    And thrift is blessing, if men steal it not.
  ANTONIO. This was a venture, sir, that Jacob serv'd for;
    A thing not in his power to bring to pass,
    But sway'd and fashion'd by the hand of heaven.
    Was this inserted to make interest good?
    Or is your gold and silver ewes and rams?
  SHYLOCK. I cannot tell; I make it breed as fast.
    But note me, signior.
  ANTONIO.  [Aside]  Mark you this, Bassanio,
    The devil can cite Scripture for his purpose.
    An evil soul producing holy witness
    Is like a villain with a smiling cheek,
    A goodly apple rotten at the heart.
    O, what a goodly outside falsehood hath!
  SHYLOCK. Three thousand ducats- 'tis a good round sum.
    Three months from twelve; then let me see, the rate-
  ANTONIO. Well, Shylock, shall we be beholding to you?
  SHYLOCK. Signior Antonio, many a time and oft
    In the Rialto you have rated me
    About my moneys and my usances;
    Still have I borne it with a patient shrug,
    For suff'rance is the badge of all our tribe;
    You call me misbeliever, cut-throat dog,
    And spit upon my Jewish gaberdine,
    And all for use of that which is mine own.
    Well then, it now appears you need my help;
    Go to, then; you come to me, and you say
    'Shylock, we would have moneys.' You say so-
    You that did void your rheum upon my beard
    And foot me as you spurn a stranger cur
    Over your threshold; moneys is your suit.
    What should I say to you? Should I not say
    'Hath a dog money? Is it possible
    A cur can lend three thousand ducats?' Or
    Shall I bend low and, in a bondman's key,
    With bated breath and whisp'ring humbleness,
    Say this:
    'Fair sir, you spit on me on Wednesday last,
    You spurn'd me such a day; another time
    You call'd me dog; and for these courtesies
    I'll lend you thus much moneys'?
  ANTONIO. I am as like to call thee so again,
    To spit on thee again, to spurn thee too.
    If thou wilt lend this money, lend it not
    As to thy friends- for when did friendship take
    A breed for barren metal of his friend?-
    But lend it rather to thine enemy,
    Who if he break thou mayst with better face
    Exact the penalty.
  SHYLOCK. Why, look you, how you storm!
    I would be friends with you, and have your love,
    Forget the shames that you have stain'd me with,
    Supply your present wants, and take no doit
    Of usance for my moneys, and you'll not hear me.
    This is kind I offer.
  BASSANIO. This were kindness.
  SHYLOCK. This kindness will I show.
    Go with me to a notary, seal me there
    Your single bond, and, in a merry sport,
    If you repay me not on such a day,
    In such a place, such sum or sums as are
    Express'd in the condition, let the forfeit
    Be nominated for an equal pound
    Of your fair flesh, to be cut off and taken
    In what part of your body pleaseth me.
  ANTONIO. Content, in faith; I'll seal to such a bond,
    And say there is much kindness in the Jew.
  BASSANIO. You shall not seal to such a bond for me;
    I'll rather dwell in my necessity.
  ANTONIO. Why, fear not, man; I will not forfeit it;
    Within these two months- that's a month before
    This bond expires- I do expect return
    Of thrice three times the value of this bond.
  SHYLOCK. O father Abram, what these Christians are,
    Whose own hard dealings teaches them suspect
    The thoughts of others! Pray you, tell me this:
    If he should break his day, what should I gain
    By the exaction of the forfeiture?
    A pound of man's flesh taken from a man
    Is not so estimable, profitable neither,
    As flesh of muttons, beefs, or goats. I say,
    To buy his favour, I extend this friendship;
    If he will take it, so; if not, adieu;
    And, for my love, I pray you wrong me not.
  ANTONIO. Yes, Shylock, I will seal unto this bond.
  SHYLOCK. Then meet me forthwith at the notary's;
    Give him direction for this merry bond,
    And I will go and purse the ducats straight,
    See to my house, left in the fearful guard
    Of an unthrifty knave, and presently
    I'll be with you.
  ANTONIO. Hie thee, gentle Jew.                    Exit SHYLOCK
    The Hebrew will turn Christian: he grows kind.
  BASSANIO. I like not fair terms and a villain's mind.
  ANTONIO. Come on; in this there can be no dismay;
    My ships come home a month before the day.            Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT II. SCENE I.
Belmont. PORTIA'S house

Flourish of cornets. Enter the PRINCE of MOROCCO, a tawny Moor all in white,
and three or four FOLLOWERS accordingly, with PORTIA, NERISSA, and train

  PRINCE OF Morocco. Mislike me not for my complexion,
    The shadowed livery of the burnish'd sun,
    To whom I am a neighbour, and near bred.
    Bring me the fairest creature northward born,
    Where Phoebus' fire scarce thaws the icicles,
    And let us make incision for your love
    To prove whose blood is reddest, his or mine.
    I tell thee, lady, this aspect of mine
    Hath fear'd the valiant; by my love, I swear
    The best-regarded virgins of our clime
    Have lov'd it too. I would not change this hue,
    Except to steal your thoughts, my gentle queen.
  PORTIA. In terms of choice I am not solely led
    By nice direction of a maiden's eyes;
    Besides, the lott'ry of my destiny
    Bars me the right of voluntary choosing.
    But, if my father had not scanted me,
    And hedg'd me by his wit to yield myself
    His wife who wins me by that means I told you,
    Yourself, renowned Prince, then stood as fair
    As any comer I have look'd on yet
    For my affection.
  PRINCE OF MOROCCO. Even for that I thank you.
    Therefore, I pray you, lead me to the caskets
    To try my fortune. By this scimitar,
    That slew the Sophy and a Persian prince,
    That won three fields of Sultan Solyman,
    I would o'erstare the sternest eyes that look,
    Outbrave the heart most daring on the earth,
    Pluck the young sucking cubs from the she-bear,
    Yea, mock the lion when 'a roars for prey,
    To win thee, lady. But, alas the while!
    If Hercules and Lichas play at dice
    Which is the better man, the greater throw
    May turn by fortune from the weaker band.
    So is Alcides beaten by his page;
    And so may I, blind Fortune leading me,
    Miss that which one unworthier may attain,
    And die with grieving.
  PORTIA. You must take your chance,
    And either not attempt to choose at all,
    Or swear before you choose, if you choose wrong,
    Never to speak to lady afterward
    In way of marriage; therefore be advis'd.
  PRINCE OF MOROCCO. Nor will not; come, bring me unto my chance.
  PORTIA. First, forward to the temple. After dinner
    Your hazard shall be made.
  PRINCE OF MOROCCO. Good fortune then,
    To make me blest or cursed'st among men!
                                           [Cornets, and exeunt]




SCENE II.
Venice. A street

Enter LAUNCELOT GOBBO

  LAUNCELOT. Certainly my conscience will serve me to run from this
    Jew my master. The fiend is at mine elbow and tempts me, saying
    to me 'Gobbo, Launcelot Gobbo, good Launcelot' or 'good Gobbo' or
    'good Launcelot Gobbo, use your legs, take the start, run away.'
    My conscience says 'No; take heed, honest Launcelot, take heed,
    honest Gobbo' or, as aforesaid, 'honest Launcelot Gobbo, do not
    run; scorn running with thy heels.' Well, the most courageous
    fiend bids me pack. 'Via!' says the fiend; 'away!' says the
    fiend. 'For the heavens, rouse up a brave mind' says the fiend
    'and run.' Well, my conscience, hanging about the neck of my
    heart, says very wisely to me 'My honest friend Launcelot, being
    an honest man's son' or rather 'an honest woman's son'; for
    indeed my father did something smack, something grow to, he had a
    kind of taste- well, my conscience says 'Launcelot, budge not.'
    'Budge,' says the fiend. 'Budge not,' says my conscience.
    'Conscience,' say I, (you counsel well.' 'Fiend,' say I, 'you
    counsel well.' To be rul'd by my conscience, I should stay with
    the Jew my master, who- God bless the mark!- is a kind of devil;
    and, to run away from the Jew, I should be ruled by the fiend,
    who- saving your reverence!- is the devil himself. Certainly the
    Jew is the very devil incarnation; and, in my conscience, my
    conscience is but a kind of hard conscience to offer to counsel
    me to stay with the Jew. The fiend gives the more friendly
    counsel. I will run, fiend; my heels are at your commandment; I
    will run.

                     Enter OLD GOBBO, with a basket

  GOBBO. Master young man, you, I pray you, which is the way to
    master Jew's?
  LAUNCELOT.  [Aside]  O heavens! This is my true-begotten father,
    who, being more than sand-blind, high-gravel blind, knows me not.
    I will try confusions with him.
  GOBBO. Master young gentleman, I pray you, which is the way to
    master Jew's?
  LAUNCELOT. Turn up on your right hand at the next turning, but, at
    the next turning of all, on your left; marry, at the very next
    turning, turn of no hand, but turn down indirectly to the Jew's
    house.
  GOBBO. Be God's sonties, 'twill be a hard way to hit! Can you tell
    me whether one Launcelot, that dwells with him, dwell with him or
    no?
  LAUNCELOT. Talk you of young Master Launcelot?  [Aside]  Mark me
    now; now will I raise the waters.- Talk you of young Master
    Launcelot?
  GOBBO. No master, sir, but a poor man's son; his father, though I
    say't, is an honest exceeding poor man, and, God be thanked, well
    to live.
  LAUNCELOT. Well, let his father be what 'a will, we talk of young
    Master Launcelot.
  GOBBO. Your worship's friend, and Launcelot, sir.
  LAUNCELOT. But I pray you, ergo, old man, ergo, I beseech you, talk
    you of young Master Launcelot?
  GOBBO. Of Launcelot, an't please your mastership.
  LAUNCELOT. Ergo, Master Launcelot. Talk not of Master Launcelot,
    father; for the young gentleman, according to Fates and Destinies
    and such odd sayings, the Sisters Three and such branches of
    learning, is indeed deceased; or, as you would say in plain
    terms, gone to heaven.
  GOBBO. Marry, God forbid! The boy was the very staff of my age, my
    very prop.
  LAUNCELOT. Do I look like a cudgel or a hovel-post, a staff or a
    prop? Do you know me, father?
  GOBBO. Alack the day, I know you not, young gentleman; but I pray
    you tell me, is my boy- God rest his soul!- alive or dead?
  LAUNCELOT. Do you not know me, father?
  GOBBO. Alack, sir, I am sand-blind; I know you not.
  LAUNCELOT. Nay, indeed, if you had your eyes, you might fail of the
    knowing me: it is a wise father that knows his own child. Well,
    old man, I will tell you news of your son. Give me your blessing;
    truth will come to light; murder cannot be hid long; a man's son
    may, but in the end truth will out.
  GOBBO. Pray you, sir, stand up; I am sure you are not Launcelot my
    boy.
  LAUNCELOT. Pray you, let's have no more fooling about it, but give
    me your blessing; I am Launcelot, your boy that was, your son
    that is, your child that shall be.
  GOBBO. I cannot think you are my son.
  LAUNCELOT. I know not what I shall think of that; but I am
    Launcelot, the Jew's man, and I am sure Margery your wife is my
    mother.
  GOBBO. Her name is Margery, indeed. I'll be sworn, if thou be
    Launcelot, thou art mine own flesh and blood. Lord worshipp'd
    might he be, what a beard hast thou got! Thou hast got more hair
    on thy chin than Dobbin my fill-horse has on his tail.
  LAUNCELOT. It should seem, then, that Dobbin's tail grows backward;
    I am sure he had more hair of his tail than I have of my face
    when I last saw him.
  GOBBO. Lord, how art thou chang'd! How dost thou and thy master
    agree? I have brought him a present. How 'gree you now?
  LAUNCELOT. Well, well; but, for mine own part, as I have set up my
    rest to run away, so I will not rest till I have run some ground.
    My master's a very Jew. Give him a present! Give him a halter. I
    am famish'd in his service; you may tell every finger I have with
    my ribs. Father, I am glad you are come; give me your present to
    one Master Bassanio, who indeed gives rare new liveries; if I
    serve not him, I will run as far as God has any ground. O rare
    fortune! Here comes the man. To him, father, for I am a Jew, if I
    serve the Jew any longer.

         Enter BASSANIO, with LEONARDO, with a FOLLOWER or two

  BASSANIO. You may do so; but let it be so hasted that supper be
    ready at the farthest by five of the clock. See these letters
    delivered, put the liveries to making, and desire Gratiano to
    come anon to my lodging.                      Exit a SERVANT
  LAUNCELOT. To him, father.
  GOBBO. God bless your worship!
  BASSANIO. Gramercy; wouldst thou aught with me?
  GOBBO. Here's my son, sir, a poor boy-
  LAUNCELOT. Not a poor boy, sir, but the rich Jew's man, that would,
    sir, as my father shall specify-
  GOBBO. He hath a great infection, sir, as one would say, to serve-
  LAUNCELOT. Indeed the short and the long is, I serve the Jew, and
    have a desire, as my father shall specify-
  GOBBO. His master and he, saving your worship's reverence, are
    scarce cater-cousins-
  LAUNCELOT. To be brief, the very truth is that the Jew, having done
    me wrong, doth cause me, as my father, being I hope an old man,
    shall frutify unto you-
  GOBBO. I have here a dish of doves that I would bestow upon your
    worship; and my suit is-
  LAUNCELOT. In very brief, the suit is impertinent to myself, as
    your worship shall know by this honest old man; and, though I say
    it, though old man, yet poor man, my father.
  BASSANIO. One speak for both. What would you?
  LAUNCELOT. Serve you, sir.
  GOBBO. That is the very defect of the matter, sir.
  BASSANIO. I know thee well; thou hast obtain'd thy suit.
    Shylock thy master spoke with me this day,
    And hath preferr'd thee, if it be preferment
    To leave a rich Jew's service to become
    The follower of so poor a gentleman.
  LAUNCELOT. The old proverb is very well parted between my master
    Shylock and you, sir: you have the grace of God, sir, and he hath
    enough.
  BASSANIO. Thou speak'st it well. Go, father, with thy son.
    Take leave of thy old master, and inquire
    My lodging out.  [To a SERVANT]  Give him a livery
    More guarded than his fellows'; see it done.
  LAUNCELOT. Father, in. I cannot get a service, no! I have ne'er a
    tongue in my head!  [Looking on his palm]  Well; if any man in
    Italy have a fairer table which doth offer to swear upon a book- I
    shall have good fortune. Go to, here's a simple line of life;
    here's a small trifle of wives; alas, fifteen wives is nothing;
    a'leven widows and nine maids is a simple coming-in for one man.
    And then to scape drowning thrice, and to be in peril of my life
    with the edge of a feather-bed-here are simple scapes. Well, if
    Fortune be a woman, she's a good wench for this gear. Father,
    come; I'll take my leave of the Jew in the twinkling.
                                  Exeunt LAUNCELOT and OLD GOBBO
  BASSANIO. I pray thee, good Leonardo, think on this.
    These things being bought and orderly bestowed,
    Return in haste, for I do feast to-night
    My best esteem'd acquaintance; hie thee, go.
  LEONARDO. My best endeavours shall be done herein.

                          Enter GRATIANO

  GRATIANO. Where's your master?
  LEONARDO. Yonder, sir, he walks.                          Exit
  GRATIANO. Signior Bassanio!
  BASSANIO. Gratiano!
  GRATIANO. I have suit to you.
  BASSANIO. You have obtain'd it.
  GRATIANO. You must not deny me: I must go with you to Belmont.
  BASSANIO. Why, then you must. But hear thee, Gratiano:
    Thou art too wild, too rude, and bold of voice-
    Parts that become thee happily enough,
    And in such eyes as ours appear not faults;
    But where thou art not known, why there they show
    Something too liberal. Pray thee, take pain
    To allay with some cold drops of modesty
    Thy skipping spirit; lest through thy wild behaviour
    I be misconst'red in the place I go to
    And lose my hopes.
  GRATIANO. Signior Bassanio, hear me:
    If I do not put on a sober habit,
    Talk with respect, and swear but now and then,
    Wear prayer-books in my pocket, look demurely,
    Nay more, while grace is saying hood mine eyes
    Thus with my hat, and sigh, and say amen,
    Use all the observance of civility
    Like one well studied in a sad ostent
    To please his grandam, never trust me more.
  BASSANIO. Well, we shall see your bearing.
  GRATIANO. Nay, but I bar to-night; you shall not gauge me
    By what we do to-night.
  BASSANIO. No, that were pity;
    I would entreat you rather to put on
    Your boldest suit of mirth, for we have friends
    That purpose merriment. But fare you well;
    I have some business.
  GRATIANO. And I must to Lorenzo and the rest;
    But we will visit you at supper-time.                 Exeunt




SCENE III.
Venice. SHYLOCK'S house

Enter JESSICA and LAUNCELOT

  JESSICA. I am sorry thou wilt leave my father so.
    Our house is hell; and thou, a merry devil,
    Didst rob it of some taste of tediousness.
    But fare thee well; there is a ducat for thee;
    And, Launcelot, soon at supper shalt thou see
    Lorenzo, who is thy new master's guest.
    Give him this letter; do it secretly.
    And so farewell. I would not have my father
    See me in talk with thee.
  LAUNCELOT. Adieu! tears exhibit my tongue. Most beautiful pagan,
    most sweet Jew! If a Christian do not play the knave and get
    thee, I am much deceived. But, adieu! these foolish drops do
    something drown my manly spirit; adieu!
  JESSICA. Farewell, good Launcelot.              Exit LAUNCELOT
    Alack, what heinous sin is it in me
    To be asham'd to be my father's child!
    But though I am a daughter to his blood,
    I am not to his manners. O Lorenzo,
    If thou keep promise, I shall end this strife,
    Become a Christian and thy loving wife.                 Exit




SCENE IV.
Venice. A street

Enter GRATIANO, LORENZO, SALERIO, and SOLANIO

  LORENZO. Nay, we will slink away in suppertime,
    Disguise us at my lodging, and return
    All in an hour.
  GRATIANO. We have not made good preparation.
  SALERIO. We have not spoke us yet of torch-bearers.
  SOLANIO. 'Tis vile, unless it may be quaintly ordered;
    And better in my mind not undertook.
  LORENZO. 'Tis now but four o'clock; we have two hours
    To furnish us.

                 Enter LAUNCELOT, With a letter

    Friend Launcelot, what's the news?
  LAUNCELOT. An it shall please you to break up this, it shall seem
    to signify.
  LORENZO. I know the hand; in faith, 'tis a fair hand,
    And whiter than the paper it writ on
    Is the fair hand that writ.
  GRATIANO. Love-news, in faith!
  LAUNCELOT. By your leave, sir.
  LORENZO. Whither goest thou?
  LAUNCELOT. Marry, sir, to bid my old master, the Jew, to sup
    to-night with my new master, the Christian.
  LORENZO. Hold, here, take this. Tell gentle Jessica
    I will not fail her; speak it privately.
    Go, gentlemen,                                Exit LAUNCELOT
    Will you prepare you for this masque to-night?
    I am provided of a torch-bearer.
  SALERIO. Ay, marry, I'll be gone about it straight.
  SOLANIO. And so will I.
  LORENZO. Meet me and Gratiano
    At Gratiano's lodging some hour hence.
  SALERIO. 'Tis good we do so.        Exeunt SALERIO and SOLANIO
  GRATIANO. Was not that letter from fair Jessica?
  LORENZO. I must needs tell thee all. She hath directed
    How I shall take her from her father's house;
    What gold and jewels she is furnish'd with;
    What page's suit she hath in readiness.
    If e'er the Jew her father come to heaven,
    It will be for his gentle daughter's sake;
    And never dare misfortune cross her foot,
    Unless she do it under this excuse,
    That she is issue to a faithless Jew.
    Come, go with me, peruse this as thou goest;
    Fair Jessica shall be my torch-bearer.                Exeunt




SCENE V.
Venice. Before SHYLOCK'S house

Enter SHYLOCK and LAUNCELOT

  SHYLOCK. Well, thou shalt see; thy eyes shall be thy judge,
    The difference of old Shylock and Bassanio.-
    What, Jessica!- Thou shalt not gormandize
    As thou hast done with me- What, Jessica!-
    And sleep and snore, and rend apparel out-
    Why, Jessica, I say!
  LAUNCELOT. Why, Jessica!
  SHYLOCK. Who bids thee call? I do not bid thee call.
  LAUNCELOT. Your worship was wont to tell me I could do nothing
    without bidding.

                          Enter JESSICA

  JESSICA. Call you? What is your will?
  SHYLOCK. I am bid forth to supper, Jessica;
    There are my keys. But wherefore should I go?
    I am not bid for love; they flatter me;
    But yet I'll go in hate, to feed upon
    The prodigal Christian. Jessica, my girl,
    Look to my house. I am right loath to go;
    There is some ill a-brewing towards my rest,
    For I did dream of money-bags to-night.
  LAUNCELOT. I beseech you, sir, go; my young master doth expect your
    reproach.
  SHYLOCK. So do I his.
  LAUNCELOT. And they have conspired together; I will not say you
    shall see a masque, but if you do, then it was not for nothing
    that my nose fell a-bleeding on Black Monday last at six o'clock
    i' th' morning, falling out that year on Ash Wednesday was four
    year, in th' afternoon.
  SHYLOCK. What, are there masques? Hear you me, Jessica:
    Lock up my doors, and when you hear the drum,
    And the vile squealing of the wry-neck'd fife,
    Clamber not you up to the casements then,
    Nor thrust your head into the public street
    To gaze on Christian fools with varnish'd faces;
    But stop my house's ears- I mean my casements;
    Let not the sound of shallow fopp'ry enter
    My sober house. By Jacob's staff, I swear
    I have no mind of feasting forth to-night;
    But I will go. Go you before me, sirrah;
    Say I will come.
  LAUNCELOT. I will go before, sir. Mistress, look out at window for
    all this.
        There will come a Christian by
        Will be worth a Jewess' eye.                        Exit
  SHYLOCK. What says that fool of Hagar's offspring, ha?
  JESSICA. His words were 'Farewell, mistress'; nothing else.
  SHYLOCK. The patch is kind enough, but a huge feeder,
    Snail-slow in profit, and he sleeps by day
    More than the wild-cat; drones hive not with me,
    Therefore I part with him; and part with him
    To one that I would have him help to waste
    His borrowed purse. Well, Jessica, go in;
    Perhaps I will return immediately.
    Do as I bid you, shut doors after you.
    Fast bind, fast find-
    A proverb never stale in thrifty mind.                  Exit
  JESSICA. Farewell; and if my fortune be not crost,
    I have a father, you a daughter, lost.                  Exit




SCENE VI.
Venice. Before SHYLOCK'S house

Enter the maskers, GRATIANO and SALERIO

  GRATIANO. This is the pent-house under which Lorenzo
    Desired us to make stand.
  SALERIO. His hour is almost past.
  GRATIANO. And it is marvel he out-dwells his hour,
    For lovers ever run before the clock.
  SALERIO. O, ten times faster Venus' pigeons fly
    To seal love's bonds new made than they are wont
    To keep obliged faith unforfeited!
  GRATIANO. That ever holds: who riseth from a feast
    With that keen appetite that he sits down?
    Where is the horse that doth untread again
    His tedious measures with the unbated fire
    That he did pace them first? All things that are
    Are with more spirit chased than enjoyed.
    How like a younker or a prodigal
    The scarfed bark puts from her native bay,
    Hugg'd and embraced by the strumpet wind;
    How like the prodigal doth she return,
    With over-weather'd ribs and ragged sails,
    Lean, rent, and beggar'd by the strumpet wind!

                       Enter LORENZO

  SALERIO. Here comes Lorenzo; more of this hereafter.
  LORENZO. Sweet friends, your patience for my long abode!
    Not I, but my affairs, have made you wait.
    When you shall please to play the thieves for wives,
    I'll watch as long for you then. Approach;
    Here dwells my father Jew. Ho! who's within?

           Enter JESSICA, above, in boy's clothes

  JESSICA. Who are you? Tell me, for more certainty,
    Albeit I'll swear that I do know your tongue.
  LORENZO. Lorenzo, and thy love.
  JESSICA. Lorenzo, certain; and my love indeed;
    For who love I so much? And now who knows
    But you, Lorenzo, whether I am yours?
  LORENZO. Heaven and thy thoughts are witness that thou art.
  JESSICA. Here, catch this casket; it is worth the pains.
    I am glad 'tis night, you do not look on me,
    For I am much asham'd of my exchange;
    But love is blind, and lovers cannot see
    The pretty follies that themselves commit,
    For, if they could, Cupid himself would blush
    To see me thus transformed to a boy.
  LORENZO. Descend, for you must be my torch-bearer.
  JESSICA. What! must I hold a candle to my shames?
    They in themselves, good sooth, are too too light.
    Why, 'tis an office of discovery, love,
    And I should be obscur'd.
  LORENZO. So are you, sweet,
    Even in the lovely garnish of a boy.
    But come at once,
    For the close night doth play the runaway,
    And we are stay'd for at Bassanio's feast.
  JESSICA. I will make fast the doors, and gild myself
    With some moe ducats, and be with you straight.
                                                      Exit above

  GRATIANO. Now, by my hood, a gentle, and no Jew.
  LORENZO. Beshrew me, but I love her heartily,
    For she is wise, if I can judge of her,
    And fair she is, if that mine eyes be true,
    And true she is, as she hath prov'd herself;
    And therefore, like herself, wise, fair, and true,
    Shall she be placed in my constant soul.

                     Enter JESSICA, below

    What, art thou come? On, gentlemen, away;
    Our masquing mates by this time for us stay.
                                   Exit with JESSICA and SALERIO

                        Enter ANTONIO

  ANTONIO. Who's there?
  GRATIANO. Signior Antonio?
  ANTONIO. Fie, fie, Gratiano, where are all the rest?
    'Tis nine o'clock; our friends all stay for you;
    No masque to-night; the wind is come about;
    Bassanio presently will go aboard;
    I have sent twenty out to seek for you.
  GRATIANO. I am glad on't; I desire no more delight
    Than to be under sail and gone to-night.              Exeunt




SCENE VII.
Belmont. PORTIA's house

Flourish of cornets. Enter PORTIA, with the PRINCE OF MOROCCO,
and their trains

  PORTIA. Go draw aside the curtains and discover
    The several caskets to this noble Prince.
    Now make your choice.
  PRINCE OF MOROCCO. The first, of gold, who this inscription bears:
    'Who chooseth me shall gain what many men desire.'
    The second, silver, which this promise carries:
    'Who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves.'
    This third, dull lead, with warning all as blunt:
    'Who chooseth me must give and hazard all he hath.'
    How shall I know if I do choose the right?
  PORTIA. The one of them contains my picture, Prince;
    If you choose that, then I am yours withal.
  PRINCE OF MOROCCO. Some god direct my judgment! Let me see;
    I will survey th' inscriptions back again.
    What says this leaden casket?
    'Who chooseth me must give and hazard all he hath.'
    Must give- for what? For lead? Hazard for lead!
    This casket threatens; men that hazard all
    Do it in hope of fair advantages.
    A golden mind stoops not to shows of dross;
    I'll then nor give nor hazard aught for lead.
    What says the silver with her virgin hue?
    'Who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves.'
    As much as he deserves! Pause there, Morocco,
    And weigh thy value with an even hand.
    If thou beest rated by thy estimation,
    Thou dost deserve enough, and yet enough
    May not extend so far as to the lady;
    And yet to be afeard of my deserving
    Were but a weak disabling of myself.
    As much as I deserve? Why, that's the lady!
    I do in birth deserve her, and in fortunes,
    In graces, and in qualities of breeding;
    But more than these, in love I do deserve.
    What if I stray'd no farther, but chose here?
    Let's see once more this saying grav'd in gold:
    'Who chooseth me shall gain what many men desire.'
    Why, that's the lady! All the world desires her;
    From the four corners of the earth they come
    To kiss this shrine, this mortal-breathing saint.
    The Hyrcanian deserts and the vasty wilds
    Of wide Arabia are as throughfares now
    For princes to come view fair Portia.
    The watery kingdom, whose ambitious head
    Spits in the face of heaven, is no bar
    To stop the foreign spirits, but they come
    As o'er a brook to see fair Portia.
    One of these three contains her heavenly picture.
    Is't like that lead contains her? 'Twere damnation
    To think so base a thought; it were too gross
    To rib her cerecloth in the obscure grave.
    Or shall I think in silver she's immur'd,
    Being ten times undervalued to tried gold?
    O sinful thought! Never so rich a gem
    Was set in worse than gold. They have in England
    A coin that bears the figure of an angel
    Stamp'd in gold; but that's insculp'd upon.
    But here an angel in a golden bed
    Lies all within. Deliver me the key;
    Here do I choose, and thrive I as I may!
  PORTIA. There, take it, Prince, and if my form lie there,
    Then I am yours.                [He opens the golden casket]
  PRINCE OF MOROCCO. O hell! what have we here?
    A carrion Death, within whose empty eye
    There is a written scroll! I'll read the writing.
         'All that glisters is not gold,
         Often have you heard that told;
         Many a man his life hath sold
         But my outside to behold.
         Gilded tombs do worms infold.
         Had you been as wise as bold,
         Young in limbs, in judgment old,
         Your answer had not been inscroll'd.
         Fare you well, your suit is cold.'
      Cold indeed, and labour lost,
      Then farewell, heat, and welcome, frost.
    Portia, adieu! I have too griev'd a heart
    To take a tedious leave; thus losers part.
                        Exit with his train. Flourish of cornets
  PORTIA. A gentle riddance. Draw the curtains, go.
    Let all of his complexion choose me so.               Exeunt




SCENE VIII.
Venice. A street

Enter SALERIO and SOLANIO

  SALERIO. Why, man, I saw Bassanio under sail;
    With him is Gratiano gone along;
    And in their ship I am sure Lorenzo is not.
  SOLANIO. The villain Jew with outcries rais'd the Duke,
    Who went with him to search Bassanio's ship.
  SALERIO. He came too late, the ship was under sail;
    But there the Duke was given to understand
    That in a gondola were seen together
    Lorenzo and his amorous Jessica;
    Besides, Antonio certified the Duke
    They were not with Bassanio in his ship.
  SOLANIO. I never heard a passion so confus'd,
    So strange, outrageous, and so variable,
    As the dog Jew did utter in the streets.
    'My daughter! O my ducats! O my daughter!
    Fled with a Christian! O my Christian ducats!
    Justice! the law! My ducats and my daughter!
    A sealed bag, two sealed bags of ducats,
    Of double ducats, stol'n from me by my daughter!
    And jewels- two stones, two rich and precious stones,
    Stol'n by my daughter! Justice! Find the girl;
    She hath the stones upon her and the ducats.'
  SALERIO. Why, all the boys in Venice follow him,
    Crying, his stones, his daughter, and his ducats.
  SOLANIO. Let good Antonio look he keep his day,
    Or he shall pay for this.
  SALERIO. Marry, well rememb'red;
    I reason'd with a Frenchman yesterday,
    Who told me, in the narrow seas that part
    The French and English, there miscarried
    A vessel of our country richly fraught.
    I thought upon Antonio when he told me,
    And wish'd in silence that it were not his.
  SOLANIO. You were best to tell Antonio what you hear;
    Yet do not suddenly, for it may grieve him.
  SALERIO. A kinder gentleman treads not the earth.
    I saw Bassanio and Antonio part.
    Bassanio told him he would make some speed
    Of his return. He answered 'Do not so;
    Slubber not business for my sake, Bassanio,
    But stay the very riping of the time;
    And for the Jew's bond which he hath of me,
    Let it not enter in your mind of love;
    Be merry, and employ your chiefest thoughts
    To courtship, and such fair ostents of love
    As shall conveniently become you there.'
    And even there, his eye being big with tears,
    Turning his face, he put his hand behind him,
    And with affection wondrous sensible
    He wrung Bassanio's hand; and so they parted.
  SOLANIO. I think he only loves the world for him.
    I pray thee, let us go and find him out,
    And quicken his embraced heaviness
    With some delight or other.
  SALERIO. Do we so.                                      Exeunt




SCENE IX.
Belmont. PORTIA'S house

Enter NERISSA, and a SERVITOR

  NERISSA. Quick, quick, I pray thee, draw the curtain straight;
    The Prince of Arragon hath ta'en his oath,
    And comes to his election presently.

       Flourish of cornets. Enter the PRINCE OF ARRAGON,
                    PORTIA, and their trains

  PORTIA. Behold, there stand the caskets, noble Prince.
    If you choose that wherein I am contain'd,
    Straight shall our nuptial rites be solemniz'd;
    But if you fail, without more speech, my lord,
    You must be gone from hence immediately.
  ARRAGON. I am enjoin'd by oath to observe three things:
    First, never to unfold to any one
    Which casket 'twas I chose; next, if I fail
    Of the right casket, never in my life
    To woo a maid in way of marriage;
    Lastly,
    If I do fail in fortune of my choice,
    Immediately to leave you and be gone.
  PORTIA. To these injunctions every one doth swear
    That comes to hazard for my worthless self.
  ARRAGON. And so have I address'd me. Fortune now
    To my heart's hope! Gold, silver, and base lead.
    'Who chooseth me must give and hazard all he hath.'
    You shall look fairer ere I give or hazard.
    What says the golden chest? Ha! let me see:
    'Who chooseth me shall gain what many men desire.'
    What many men desire- that 'many' may be meant
    By the fool multitude, that choose by show,
    Not learning more than the fond eye doth teach;
    Which pries not to th' interior, but, like the martlet,
    Builds in the weather on the outward wall,
    Even in the force and road of casualty.
    I will not choose what many men desire,
    Because I will not jump with common spirits
    And rank me with the barbarous multitudes.
    Why, then to thee, thou silver treasure-house!
    Tell me once more what title thou dost bear.
    'Who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves.'
    And well said too; for who shall go about
    To cozen fortune, and be honourable
    Without the stamp of merit? Let none presume
    To wear an undeserved dignity.
    O that estates, degrees, and offices,
    Were not deriv'd corruptly, and that clear honour
    Were purchas'd by the merit of the wearer!
    How many then should cover that stand bare!
    How many be commanded that command!
    How much low peasantry would then be gleaned
    From the true seed of honour! and how much honour
    Pick'd from the chaff and ruin of the times,
    To be new varnish'd! Well, but to my choice.
    'Who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves.'
    I will assume desert. Give me a key for this,
    And instantly unlock my fortunes here.
                                    [He opens the silver casket]
  PORTIA.  [Aside]  Too long a pause for that which you find there.
  ARRAGON. What's here? The portrait of a blinking idiot
    Presenting me a schedule! I will read it.
    How much unlike art thou to Portia!
    How much unlike my hopes and my deservings!
    'Who chooseth me shall have as much as he deserves.'
    Did I deserve no more than a fool's head?
    Is that my prize? Are my deserts no better?
  PORTIA. To offend and judge are distinct offices
    And of opposed natures.
  ARRAGON. What is here?  [Reads]

         'The fire seven times tried this;
         Seven times tried that judgment is
         That did never choose amiss.
         Some there be that shadows kiss,
         Such have but a shadow's bliss.
         There be fools alive iwis
         Silver'd o'er, and so was this.
         Take what wife you will to bed,
         I will ever be your head.
         So be gone; you are sped.'

         Still more fool I shall appear
         By the time I linger here.
         With one fool's head I came to woo,
         But I go away with two.
         Sweet, adieu! I'll keep my oath,
         Patiently to bear my wroth.         Exit with his train

  PORTIA. Thus hath the candle sing'd the moth.
    O, these deliberate fools! When they do choose,
    They have the wisdom by their wit to lose.
  NERISSA. The ancient saying is no heresy:
    Hanging and wiving goes by destiny.
  PORTIA. Come, draw the curtain, Nerissa.

                       Enter a SERVANT

  SERVANT. Where is my lady?
  PORTIA. Here; what would my lord?
  SERVANT. Madam, there is alighted at your gate
    A young Venetian, one that comes before
    To signify th' approaching of his lord,
    From whom he bringeth sensible regreets;
    To wit, besides commends and courteous breath,
    Gifts of rich value. Yet I have not seen
    So likely an ambassador of love.
    A day in April never came so sweet
    To show how costly summer was at hand
    As this fore-spurrer comes before his lord.
  PORTIA. No more, I pray thee; I am half afeard
    Thou wilt say anon he is some kin to thee,
    Thou spend'st such high-day wit in praising him.
    Come, come, Nerissa, for I long to see
    Quick Cupid's post that comes so mannerly.
  NERISSA. Bassanio, Lord Love, if thy will it be!        Exeunt




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT III. SCENE I.
Venice. A street

Enter SOLANIO and SALERIO

  SOLANIO. Now, what news on the Rialto?
  SALERIO. Why, yet it lives there uncheck'd that Antonio hath a ship
    of rich lading wreck'd on the narrow seas; the Goodwins I think
    they call the place, a very dangerous flat and fatal, where the
    carcases of many a tall ship lie buried, as they say, if my
    gossip Report be an honest woman of her word.
  SOLANIO. I would she were as lying a gossip in that as ever knapp'd
    ginger or made her neighbours believe she wept for the death of a
    third husband. But it is true, without any slips of prolixity or
    crossing the plain highway of talk, that the good Antonio, the
    honest Antonio- O that I had a title good enough to keep his name
    company!-
  SALERIO. Come, the full stop.
  SOLANIO. Ha! What sayest thou? Why, the end is, he hath lost a
    ship.
  SALERIO. I would it might prove the end of his losses.
  SOLANIO. Let me say amen betimes, lest the devil cross my prayer,
    for here he comes in the likeness of a Jew.

                             Enter SHYLOCK

    How now, Shylock? What news among the merchants?
  SHYLOCK. You knew, none so well, none so well as you, of my
    daughter's flight.
  SALERIO. That's certain; I, for my part, knew the tailor that made
    the wings she flew withal.
  SOLANIO. And Shylock, for his own part, knew the bird was flidge;
    and then it is the complexion of them all to leave the dam.
  SHYLOCK. She is damn'd for it.
  SALERIO. That's certain, if the devil may be her judge.
  SHYLOCK. My own flesh and blood to rebel!
  SOLANIO. Out upon it, old carrion! Rebels it at these years?
  SHYLOCK. I say my daughter is my flesh and my blood.
  SALERIO. There is more difference between thy flesh and hers than
    between jet and ivory; more between your bloods than there is
    between red wine and Rhenish. But tell us, do you hear whether
    Antonio have had any loss at sea or no?
  SHYLOCK. There I have another bad match: a bankrupt, a prodigal,
    who dare scarce show his head on the Rialto; a beggar, that was
    us'd to come so smug upon the mart. Let him look to his bond. He
    was wont to call me usurer; let him look to his bond. He was wont
    to lend money for a Christian courtesy; let him look to his bond.
  SALERIO. Why, I am sure, if he forfeit, thou wilt not take his
    flesh. What's that good for?
  SHYLOCK. To bait fish withal. If it will feed nothing else, it will
    feed my revenge. He hath disgrac'd me and hind'red me half a
    million; laugh'd at my losses, mock'd at my gains, scorned my
    nation, thwarted my bargains, cooled my friends, heated mine
    enemies. And what's his reason? I am a Jew. Hath not a Jew eyes?
    Hath not a Jew hands, organs, dimensions, senses, affections,
    passions, fed with the same food, hurt with the same weapons,
    subject to the same diseases, healed by the same means, warmed
    and cooled by the same winter and summer, as a Christian is? If
    you prick us, do we not bleed? If you tickle us, do we not laugh?
    If you poison us, do we not die? And if you wrong us, shall we
    not revenge? If we are like you in the rest, we will resemble you
    in that. If a Jew wrong a Christian, what is his humility?
    Revenge. If a Christian wrong a Jew, what should his sufferance
    be by Christian example? Why, revenge. The villainy you teach me
    I will execute; and itshall go hard but I will better the
    instruction.

                    Enter a MAN from ANTONIO

  MAN. Gentlemen, my master Antonio is at his house, and desires to
    speak with you both.
  SALERIO. We have been up and down to seek him.

                          Enter TUBAL

  SOLANIO. Here comes another of the tribe; a third cannot be
    match'd, unless the devil himself turn Jew.
                                Exeunt SOLANIO, SALERIO, and MAN
  SHYLOCK. How now, Tubal, what news from Genoa? Hast thou found my
    daughter?
  TUBAL. I often came where I did hear of her, but cannot find her.
  SHYLOCK. Why there, there, there, there! A diamond gone, cost me
    two thousand ducats in Frankfort! The curse never fell upon our
    nation till now; I never felt it till now. Two thousand ducats in
    that, and other precious, precious jewels. I would my daughter
    were dead at my foot, and the jewels in her ear; would she were
    hears'd at my foot, and the ducats in her coffin! No news of
    them? Why, so- and I know not what's spent in the search. Why,
    thou- loss upon loss! The thief gone with so much, and so much to
    find the thief; and no satisfaction, no revenge; nor no ill luck
    stirring but what lights o' my shoulders; no sighs but o' my
    breathing; no tears but o' my shedding!
  TUBAL. Yes, other men have ill luck too: Antonio, as I heard in
    Genoa-
  SHYLOCK. What, what, what? Ill luck, ill luck?
  TUBAL. Hath an argosy cast away coming from Tripolis.
  SHYLOCK. I thank God, I thank God. Is it true, is it true?
  TUBAL. I spoke with some of the sailors that escaped the wreck.
  SHYLOCK. I thank thee, good Tubal. Good news, good news- ha, ha!-
    heard in Genoa.
  TUBAL. Your daughter spent in Genoa, as I heard, one night,
    fourscore ducats.
  SHYLOCK. Thou stick'st a dagger in me- I shall never see my gold
    again. Fourscore ducats at a sitting! Fourscore ducats!
  TUBAL. There came divers of Antonio's creditors in my company to
    Venice that swear he cannot choose but break.
  SHYLOCK. I am very glad of it; I'll plague him, I'll torture him; I
    am glad of it.
  TUBAL. One of them showed me a ring that he had of your daughter
    for a monkey.
  SHYLOCK. Out upon her! Thou torturest me, Tubal. It was my
    turquoise; I had it of Leah when I was a bachelor; I would not
    have given it for a wilderness of monkeys.
  TUBAL. But Antonio is certainly undone.
  SHYLOCK. Nay, that's true; that's very true. Go, Tubal, fee me an
    officer; bespeak him a fortnight before. I will have the heart of
    him, if he forfeit; for, were he out of Venice, I can make what
    merchandise I will. Go, Tubal, and meet me at our synagogue; go,
    good Tubal; at our synagogue, Tubal.                  Exeunt




SCENE II.
Belmont. PORTIA'S house

Enter BASSANIO, PORTIA, GRATIANO, NERISSA, and all their trains

  PORTIA. I pray you tarry; pause a day or two
    Before you hazard; for, in choosing wrong,
    I lose your company; therefore forbear a while.
    There's something tells me- but it is not love-
    I would not lose you; and you know yourself
    Hate counsels not in such a quality.
    But lest you should not understand me well-
    And yet a maiden hath no tongue but thought-
    I would detain you here some month or two
    Before you venture for me. I could teach you
    How to choose right, but then I am forsworn;
    So will I never be; so may you miss me;
    But if you do, you'll make me wish a sin,
    That I had been forsworn. Beshrew your eyes!
    They have o'erlook'd me and divided me;
    One half of me is yours, the other half yours-
    Mine own, I would say; but if mine, then yours,
    And so all yours. O! these naughty times
    Puts bars between the owners and their rights;
    And so, though yours, not yours. Prove it so,
    Let fortune go to hell for it, not I.
    I speak too long, but 'tis to peize the time,
    To eke it, and to draw it out in length,
    To stay you from election.
  BASSANIO. Let me choose;
    For as I am, I live upon the rack.
  PORTIA. Upon the rack, Bassanio? Then confess
    What treason there is mingled with your love.
  BASSANIO. None but that ugly treason of mistrust
    Which makes me fear th' enjoying of my love;
    There may as well be amity and life
    'Tween snow and fire as treason and my love.
  PORTIA. Ay, but I fear you speak upon the rack,
    Where men enforced do speak anything.
  BASSANIO. Promise me life, and I'll confess the truth.
  PORTIA. Well then, confess and live.
  BASSANIO. 'Confess' and 'love'
    Had been the very sum of my confession.
    O happy torment, when my torturer
    Doth teach me answers for deliverance!
    But let me to my fortune and the caskets.
  PORTIA. Away, then; I am lock'd in one of them.
    If you do love me, you will find me out.
    Nerissa and the rest, stand all aloof;
    Let music sound while he doth make his choice;
    Then, if he lose, he makes a swan-like end,
    Fading in music. That the comparison
    May stand more proper, my eye shall be the stream
    And wat'ry death-bed for him. He may win;
    And what is music then? Then music is
    Even as the flourish when true subjects bow
    To a new-crowned monarch; such it is
    As are those dulcet sounds in break of day
    That creep into the dreaming bridegroom's ear
    And summon him to marriage. Now he goes,
    With no less presence, but with much more love,
    Than young Alcides when he did redeem
    The virgin tribute paid by howling Troy
    To the sea-monster. I stand for sacrifice;
    The rest aloof are the Dardanian wives,
    With bleared visages come forth to view
    The issue of th' exploit. Go, Hercules!
    Live thou, I live. With much much more dismay
    I view the fight than thou that mak'st the fray.

                            A SONG

      the whilst BASSANIO comments on the caskets to himself

                 Tell me where is fancy bred,
                 Or in the heart or in the head,
                 How begot, how nourished?
                   Reply, reply.
                 It is engend'red in the eyes,
                 With gazing fed; and fancy dies
                 In the cradle where it lies.
                   Let us all ring fancy's knell:
                   I'll begin it- Ding, dong, bell.
  ALL.           Ding, dong, bell.

  BASSANIO. So may the outward shows be least themselves;
    The world is still deceiv'd with ornament.
    In law, what plea so tainted and corrupt
    But, being season'd with a gracious voice,
    Obscures the show of evil? In religion,
    What damned error but some sober brow
    Will bless it, and approve it with a text,
    Hiding the grossness with fair ornament?
    There is no vice so simple but assumes
    Some mark of virtue on his outward parts.
    How many cowards, whose hearts are all as false
    As stairs of sand, wear yet upon their chins
    The beards of Hercules and frowning Mars;
    Who, inward search'd, have livers white as milk!
    And these assume but valour's excrement
    To render them redoubted. Look on beauty
    And you shall see 'tis purchas'd by the weight,
    Which therein works a miracle in nature,
    Making them lightest that wear most of it;
    So are those crisped snaky golden locks
    Which make such wanton gambols with the wind
    Upon supposed fairness often known
    To be the dowry of a second head-
    The skull that bred them in the sepulchre.
    Thus ornament is but the guiled shore
    To a most dangerous sea; the beauteous scarf
    Veiling an Indian beauty; in a word,
    The seeming truth which cunning times put on
    To entrap the wisest. Therefore, thou gaudy gold,
    Hard food for Midas, I will none of thee;
    Nor none of thee, thou pale and common drudge
    'Tween man and man; but thou, thou meagre lead,
    Which rather threaten'st than dost promise aught,
    Thy plainness moves me more than eloquence,
    And here choose I. Joy be the consequence!
  PORTIA.  [Aside]  How all the other passions fleet to air,
    As doubtful thoughts, and rash-embrac'd despair,
    And shudd'ring fear, and green-ey'd jealousy!
    O love, be moderate, allay thy ecstasy,
    In measure rain thy joy, scant this excess!
    I feel too much thy blessing. Make it less,
    For fear I surfeit.
  BASSANIO.  [Opening the leaden casket]  What find I here?
    Fair Portia's counterfeit! What demi-god
    Hath come so near creation? Move these eyes?
    Or whether riding on the balls of mine
    Seem they in motion? Here are sever'd lips,
    Parted with sugar breath; so sweet a bar
    Should sunder such sweet friends. Here in her hairs
    The painter plays the spider, and hath woven
    A golden mesh t' entrap the hearts of men
    Faster than gnats in cobwebs. But her eyes-
    How could he see to do them? Having made one,
    Methinks it should have power to steal both his,
    And leave itself unfurnish'd. Yet look how far
    The substance of my praise doth wrong this shadow
    In underprizing it, so far this shadow
    Doth limp behind the substance. Here's the scroll,
    The continent and summary of my fortune.
         'You that choose not by the view,
         Chance as fair and choose as true!
         Since this fortune falls to you,
         Be content and seek no new.
         If you be well pleas'd with this,
         And hold your fortune for your bliss,
         Turn to where your lady is
         And claim her with a loving kiss.'
    A gentle scroll. Fair lady, by your leave;
    I come by note, to give and to receive.
    Like one of two contending in a prize,
    That thinks he hath done well in people's eyes,
    Hearing applause and universal shout,
    Giddy in spirit, still gazing in a doubt
    Whether those peals of praise be his or no;
    So, thrice-fair lady, stand I even so,
    As doubtful whether what I see be true,
    Until confirm'd, sign'd, ratified by you.
  PORTIA. You see me, Lord Bassanio, where I stand,
    Such as I am. Though for myself alone
    I would not be ambitious in my wish
    To wish myself much better, yet for you
    I would be trebled twenty times myself,
    A thousand times more fair, ten thousand times more rich,
    That only to stand high in your account
    I might in virtues, beauties, livings, friends,
    Exceed account. But the full sum of me
    Is sum of something which, to term in gross,
    Is an unlesson'd girl, unschool'd, unpractis'd;
    Happy in this, she is not yet so old
    But she may learn; happier than this,
    She is not bred so dull but she can learn;
    Happiest of all is that her gentle spirit
    Commits itself to yours to be directed,
    As from her lord, her governor, her king.
    Myself and what is mine to you and yours
    Is now converted. But now I was the lord
    Of this fair mansion, master of my servants,
    Queen o'er myself; and even now, but now,
    This house, these servants, and this same myself,
    Are yours- my lord's. I give them with this ring,
    Which when you part from, lose, or give away,
    Let it presage the ruin of your love,
    And be my vantage to exclaim on you.
  BASSANIO. Madam, you have bereft me of all words;
    Only my blood speaks to you in my veins;
    And there is such confusion in my powers
    As, after some oration fairly spoke
    By a beloved prince, there doth appear
    Among the buzzing pleased multitude,
    Where every something, being blent together,
    Turns to a wild of nothing, save of joy
    Express'd and not express'd. But when this ring
    Parts from this finger, then parts life from hence;
    O, then be bold to say Bassanio's dead!
  NERISSA. My lord and lady, it is now our time
    That have stood by and seen our wishes prosper
    To cry 'Good joy.' Good joy, my lord and lady!
  GRATIANO. My Lord Bassanio, and my gentle lady,
    I wish you all the joy that you can wish,
    For I am sure you can wish none from me;
    And, when your honours mean to solemnize
    The bargain of your faith, I do beseech you
    Even at that time I may be married too.
  BASSANIO. With all my heart, so thou canst get a wife.
  GRATIANO. I thank your lordship, you have got me one.
    My eyes, my lord, can look as swift as yours:
    You saw the mistress, I beheld the maid;
    You lov'd, I lov'd; for intermission
    No more pertains to me, my lord, than you.
    Your fortune stood upon the caskets there,
    And so did mine too, as the matter falls;
    For wooing here until I sweat again,
    And swearing till my very roof was dry
    With oaths of love, at last- if promise last-
    I got a promise of this fair one here
    To have her love, provided that your fortune
    Achiev'd her mistress.
  PORTIA. Is this true, Nerissa?
  NERISSA. Madam, it is, so you stand pleas'd withal.
  BASSANIO. And do you, Gratiano, mean good faith?
  GRATIANO. Yes, faith, my lord.
  BASSANIO. Our feast shall be much honoured in your marriage.
  GRATIANO. We'll play with them: the first boy for a thousand
    ducats.
  NERISSA. What, and stake down?
  GRATIANO. No; we shall ne'er win at that sport, and stake down-
    But who comes here? Lorenzo and his infidel?
    What, and my old Venetian friend, Salerio!

          Enter LORENZO, JESSICA, and SALERIO, a messenger
                           from Venice

  BASSANIO. Lorenzo and Salerio, welcome hither,
    If that the youth of my new int'rest here
    Have power to bid you welcome. By your leave,
    I bid my very friends and countrymen,
    Sweet Portia, welcome.
  PORTIA. So do I, my lord;
    They are entirely welcome.
  LORENZO. I thank your honour. For my part, my lord,
    My purpose was not to have seen you here;
    But meeting with Salerio by the way,
    He did entreat me, past all saying nay,
    To come with him along.
  SALERIO. I did, my lord,
    And I have reason for it. Signior Antonio
    Commends him to you.               [Gives BASSANIO a letter]
  BASSANIO. Ere I ope his letter,
    I pray you tell me how my good friend doth.
  SALERIO. Not sick, my lord, unless it be in mind;
    Nor well, unless in mind; his letter there
    Will show you his estate.        [BASSANIO opens the letter]
  GRATIANO. Nerissa, cheer yond stranger; bid her welcome.
    Your hand, Salerio. What's the news from Venice?
    How doth that royal merchant, good Antonio?
    I know he will be glad of our success:
    We are the Jasons, we have won the fleece.
  SALERIO. I would you had won the fleece that he hath lost.
  PORTIA. There are some shrewd contents in yond same paper
    That steals the colour from Bassanio's cheek:
    Some dear friend dead, else nothing in the world
    Could turn so much the constitution
    Of any constant man. What, worse and worse!
    With leave, Bassanio: I am half yourself,
    And I must freely have the half of anything
    That this same paper brings you.
  BASSANIO. O sweet Portia,
    Here are a few of the unpleasant'st words
    That ever blotted paper! Gentle lady,
    When I did first impart my love to you,
    I freely told you all the wealth I had
    Ran in my veins- I was a gentleman;
    And then I told you true. And yet, dear lady,
    Rating myself at nothing, you shall see
    How much I was a braggart. When I told you
    My state was nothing, I should then have told you
    That I was worse than nothing; for indeed
    I have engag'd myself to a dear friend,
    Engag'd my friend to his mere enemy,
    To feed my means. Here is a letter, lady,
    The paper as the body of my friend,
    And every word in it a gaping wound
    Issuing life-blood. But is it true, Salerio?
    Hath all his ventures fail'd? What, not one hit?
    From Tripolis, from Mexico, and England,
    From Lisbon, Barbary, and India,
    And not one vessel scape the dreadful touch
    Of merchant-marring rocks?
  SALERIO. Not one, my lord.
    Besides, it should appear that, if he had
    The present money to discharge the Jew,
    He would not take it. Never did I know
    A creature that did bear the shape of man
    So keen and greedy to confound a man.
    He plies the Duke at morning and at night,
    And doth impeach the freedom of the state,
    If they deny him justice. Twenty merchants,
    The Duke himself, and the magnificoes
    Of greatest port, have all persuaded with him;
    But none can drive him from the envious plea
    Of forfeiture, of justice, and his bond.
  JESSICA. When I was with him, I have heard him swear
    To Tubal and to Chus, his countrymen,
    That he would rather have Antonio's flesh
    Than twenty times the value of the sum
    That he did owe him; and I know, my lord,
    If law, authority, and power, deny not,
    It will go hard with poor Antonio.
  PORTIA. Is it your dear friend that is thus in trouble?
  BASSANIO. The dearest friend to me, the kindest man,
    The best condition'd and unwearied spirit
    In doing courtesies; and one in whom
    The ancient Roman honour more appears
    Than any that draws breath in Italy.
  PORTIA. What sum owes he the Jew?
  BASSANIO. For me, three thousand ducats.
  PORTIA. What! no more?
    Pay him six thousand, and deface the bond;
    Double six thousand, and then treble that,
    Before a friend of this description
    Shall lose a hair through Bassanio's fault.
    First go with me to church and call me wife,
    And then away to Venice to your friend;
    For never shall you lie by Portia's side
    With an unquiet soul. You shall have gold
    To pay the petty debt twenty times over.
    When it is paid, bring your true friend along.
    My maid Nerissa and myself meantime
    Will live as maids and widows. Come, away;
    For you shall hence upon your wedding day.
    Bid your friends welcome, show a merry cheer;
    Since you are dear bought, I will love you dear.
    But let me hear the letter of your friend.
  BASSANIO.  [Reads]  'Sweet Bassanio, my ships have all miscarried,
    my creditors grow cruel, my estate is very low, my bond to the
    Jew is forfeit; and since, in paying it, it is impossible I
    should live, all debts are clear'd between you and I, if I might
    but see you at my death. Notwithstanding, use your pleasure; if
    your love do not persuade you to come, let not my letter.'
  PORTIA. O love, dispatch all business and be gone!
  BASSANIO. Since I have your good leave to go away,
    I will make haste; but, till I come again,
    No bed shall e'er be guilty of my stay,
    Nor rest be interposer 'twixt us twain.               Exeunt




SCENE III.
Venice. A street

Enter SHYLOCK, SOLANIO, ANTONIO, and GAOLER

  SHYLOCK. Gaoler, look to him. Tell not me of mercy-
    This is the fool that lent out money gratis.
    Gaoler, look to him.
  ANTONIO. Hear me yet, good Shylock.
  SHYLOCK. I'll have my bond; speak not against my bond.
    I have sworn an oath that I will have my bond.
    Thou call'dst me dog before thou hadst a cause,
    But, since I am a dog, beware my fangs;
    The Duke shall grant me justice. I do wonder,
    Thou naughty gaoler, that thou art so fond
    To come abroad with him at his request.
  ANTONIO. I pray thee hear me speak.
  SHYLOCK. I'll have my bond. I will not hear thee speak;
    I'll have my bond; and therefore speak no more.
    I'll not be made a soft and dull-ey'd fool,
    To shake the head, relent, and sigh, and yield,
    To Christian intercessors. Follow not;
    I'll have no speaking; I will have my bond.             Exit
  SOLANIO. It is the most impenetrable cur
    That ever kept with men.
  ANTONIO. Let him alone;
    I'll follow him no more with bootless prayers.
    He seeks my life; his reason well I know:
    I oft deliver'd from his forfeitures
    Many that have at times made moan to me;
    Therefore he hates me.
  SOLANIO. I am sure the Duke
    Will never grant this forfeiture to hold.
  ANTONIO. The Duke cannot deny the course of law;
    For the commodity that strangers have
    With us in Venice, if it be denied,
    Will much impeach the justice of the state,
    Since that the trade and profit of the city
    Consisteth of all nations. Therefore, go;
    These griefs and losses have so bated me
    That I shall hardly spare a pound of flesh
    To-morrow to my bloody creditor.
    Well, gaoler, on; pray God Bassanio come
    To see me pay his debt, and then I care not.          Exeunt




SCENE IV.
Belmont. PORTIA'S house

Enter PORTIA, NERISSA, LORENZO, JESSICA, and BALTHASAR

  LORENZO. Madam, although I speak it in your presence,
    You have a noble and a true conceit
    Of godlike amity, which appears most strongly
    In bearing thus the absence of your lord.
    But if you knew to whom you show this honour,
    How true a gentleman you send relief,
    How dear a lover of my lord your husband,
    I know you would be prouder of the work
    Than customary bounty can enforce you.
  PORTIA. I never did repent for doing good,
    Nor shall not now; for in companions
    That do converse and waste the time together,
    Whose souls do bear an equal yoke of love,
    There must be needs a like proportion
    Of lineaments, of manners, and of spirit,
    Which makes me think that this Antonio,
    Being the bosom lover of my lord,
    Must needs be like my lord. If it be so,
    How little is the cost I have bestowed
    In purchasing the semblance of my soul
    From out the state of hellish cruelty!
    This comes too near the praising of myself;
    Therefore, no more of it; hear other things.
    Lorenzo, I commit into your hands
    The husbandry and manage of my house
    Until my lord's return; for mine own part,
    I have toward heaven breath'd a secret vow
    To live in prayer and contemplation,
    Only attended by Nerissa here,
    Until her husband and my lord's return.
    There is a monastery two miles off,
    And there we will abide. I do desire you
    Not to deny this imposition,
    The which my love and some necessity
    Now lays upon you.
  LORENZO. Madam, with all my heart
    I shall obey you in an fair commands.
  PORTIA. My people do already know my mind,
    And will acknowledge you and Jessica
    In place of Lord Bassanio and myself.
    So fare you well till we shall meet again.
  LORENZO. Fair thoughts and happy hours attend on you!
  JESSICA. I wish your ladyship all heart's content.
  PORTIA. I thank you for your wish, and am well pleas'd
    To wish it back on you. Fare you well, Jessica.
                                      Exeunt JESSICA and LORENZO
    Now, Balthasar,
    As I have ever found thee honest-true,
    So let me find thee still. Take this same letter,
    And use thou all th' endeavour of a man
    In speed to Padua; see thou render this
    Into my cousin's hands, Doctor Bellario;
    And look what notes and garments he doth give thee,
    Bring them, I pray thee, with imagin'd speed
    Unto the traject, to the common ferry
    Which trades to Venice. Waste no time in words,
    But get thee gone; I shall be there before thee.
  BALTHASAR. Madam, I go with all convenient speed.         Exit
  PORTIA. Come on, Nerissa, I have work in hand
    That you yet know not of; we'll see our husbands
    Before they think of us.
  NERISSA. Shall they see us?
  PORTIA. They shall, Nerissa; but in such a habit
    That they shall think we are accomplished
    With that we lack. I'll hold thee any wager,
    When we are both accoutred like young men,
    I'll prove the prettier fellow of the two,
    And wear my dagger with the braver grace,
    And speak between the change of man and boy
    With a reed voice; and turn two mincing steps
    Into a manly stride; and speak of frays
    Like a fine bragging youth; and tell quaint lies,
    How honourable ladies sought my love,
    Which I denying, they fell sick and died-
    I could not do withal. Then I'll repent,
    And wish for all that, that I had not kill'd them.
    And twenty of these puny lies I'll tell,
    That men shall swear I have discontinued school
    About a twelvemonth. I have within my mind
    A thousand raw tricks of these bragging Jacks,
    Which I will practise.
  NERISSA. Why, shall we turn to men?
  PORTIA. Fie, what a question's that,
    If thou wert near a lewd interpreter!
    But come, I'll tell thee all my whole device
    When I am in my coach, which stays for us
    At the park gate; and therefore haste away,
    For we must measure twenty miles to-day.              Exeunt




SCENE V.
Belmont. The garden

Enter LAUNCELOT and JESSICA

  LAUNCELOT. Yes, truly; for, look you, the sins of the father are to
    be laid upon the children; therefore, I promise you, I fear you.
    I was always plain with you, and so now I speak my agitation of
    the matter; therefore be o' good cheer, for truly I think you are
    damn'd. There is but one hope in it that can do you any good, and
    that is but a kind of bastard hope, neither.
  JESSICA. And what hope is that, I pray thee?
  LAUNCELOT. Marry, you may partly hope that your father got you not-
   that you are not the Jew's daughter.
  JESSICA. That were a kind of bastard hope indeed; so the sins of my
    mother should be visited upon me.
  LAUNCELOT. Truly then I fear you are damn'd both by father and
    mother; thus when I shun Scylla, your father, I fall into
    Charybdis, your mother; well, you are gone both ways.
  JESSICA. I shall be sav'd by my husband; he hath made me a
    Christian.
  LAUNCELOT. Truly, the more to blame he; we were Christians enow
    before, e'en as many as could well live one by another. This
    making of Christians will raise the price of hogs; if we grow all
    to be pork-eaters, we shall not shortly have a rasher on the
    coals for money.

                             Enter LORENZO

  JESSICA. I'll tell my husband, Launcelot, what you say; here he
    comes.
  LORENZO. I shall grow jealous of you shortly, Launcelot, if you
    thus get my wife into corners.
  JESSICA. Nay, you need nor fear us, Lorenzo; Launcelot and I are
    out; he tells me flatly there's no mercy for me in heaven,
    because I am a Jew's daughter; and he says you are no good member
    of the commonwealth, for in converting Jews to Christians you
    raise the price of pork.
  LORENZO. I shall answer that better to the commonwealth than you
    can the getting up of the negro's belly; the Moor is with child
    by you, Launcelot.
  LAUNCELOT. It is much that the Moor should be more than reason; but
    if she be less than an honest woman, she is indeed more than I
    took her for.
  LORENZO. How every fool can play upon the word! I think the best
    grace of wit will shortly turn into silence, and discourse grow
    commendable in none only but parrots. Go in, sirrah; bid them
    prepare for dinner.
  LAUNCELOT. That is done, sir; they have all stomachs.
  LORENZO. Goodly Lord, what a wit-snapper are you! Then bid them
    prepare dinner.
  LAUNCELOT. That is done too, sir, only 'cover' is the word.
  LORENZO. Will you cover, then, sir?
  LAUNCELOT. Not so, sir, neither; I know my duty.
  LORENZO. Yet more quarrelling with occasion! Wilt thou show the
    whole wealth of thy wit in an instant? I pray thee understand a
    plain man in his plain meaning: go to thy fellows, bid them cover
    the table, serve in the meat, and we will come in to dinner.
  LAUNCELOT. For the table, sir, it shall be serv'd in; for the meat,
    sir, it shall be cover'd; for your coming in to dinner, sir, why,
    let it be as humours and conceits shall govern.
 Exit
  LORENZO. O dear discretion, how his words are suited!
    The fool hath planted in his memory
    An army of good words; and I do know
    A many fools that stand in better place,
    Garnish'd like him, that for a tricksy word
    Defy the matter. How cheer'st thou, Jessica?
    And now, good sweet, say thy opinion,
    How dost thou like the Lord Bassanio's wife?
  JESSICA. Past all expressing. It is very meet
    The Lord Bassanio live an upright life,
    For, having such a blessing in his lady,
    He finds the joys of heaven here on earth;
    And if on earth he do not merit it,
    In reason he should never come to heaven.
    Why, if two gods should play some heavenly match,
    And on the wager lay two earthly women,
    And Portia one, there must be something else
    Pawn'd with the other; for the poor rude world
    Hath not her fellow.
  LORENZO. Even such a husband
    Hast thou of me as she is for a wife.
  JESSICA. Nay, but ask my opinion too of that.
  LORENZO. I will anon; first let us go to dinner.
  JESSICA. Nay, let me praise you while I have a stomach.
  LORENZO. No, pray thee, let it serve for table-talk;
    Then howsome'er thou speak'st, 'mong other things
    I shall digest it.
  JESSICA. Well, I'll set you forth.                      Exeunt




ACT IV. SCENE I.
Venice. The court of justice

Enter the DUKE, the MAGNIFICOES, ANTONIO, BASSANIO, GRATIANO, SALERIO,
and OTHERS

  DUKE OF VENICE. What, is Antonio here?
  ANTONIO. Ready, so please your Grace.
  DUKE OF VENICE. I am sorry for thee; thou art come to answer
    A stony adversary, an inhuman wretch,
    Uncapable of pity, void and empty
    From any dram of mercy.
  ANTONIO. I have heard
    Your Grace hath ta'en great pains to qualify
    His rigorous course; but since he stands obdurate,
    And that no lawful means can carry me
    Out of his envy's reach, I do oppose
    My patience to his fury, and am arm'd
    To suffer with a quietness of spirit
    The very tyranny and rage of his.
  DUKE OF VENICE. Go one, and call the Jew into the court.
  SALERIO. He is ready at the door; he comes, my lord.

                          Enter SHYLOCK

  DUKE OF VENICE. Make room, and let him stand before our face.
    Shylock, the world thinks, and I think so too,
    That thou but leadest this fashion of thy malice
    To the last hour of act; and then, 'tis thought,
    Thou'lt show thy mercy and remorse, more strange
    Than is thy strange apparent cruelty;
    And where thou now exacts the penalty,
    Which is a pound of this poor merchant's flesh,
    Thou wilt not only loose the forfeiture,
    But, touch'd with human gentleness and love,
    Forgive a moiety of the principal,
    Glancing an eye of pity on his losses,
    That have of late so huddled on his back-
    Enow to press a royal merchant down,
    And pluck commiseration of his state
    From brassy bosoms and rough hearts of flint,
    From stubborn Turks and Tartars, never train'd
    To offices of tender courtesy.
    We all expect a gentle answer, Jew.
  SHYLOCK. I have possess'd your Grace of what I purpose,
    And by our holy Sabbath have I sworn
    To have the due and forfeit of my bond.
    If you deny it, let the danger light
    Upon your charter and your city's freedom.
    You'll ask me why I rather choose to have
    A weight of carrion flesh than to receive
    Three thousand ducats. I'll not answer that,
    But say it is my humour- is it answer'd?
    What if my house be troubled with a rat,
    And I be pleas'd to give ten thousand ducats
    To have it ban'd? What, are you answer'd yet?
    Some men there are love not a gaping pig;
    Some that are mad if they behold a cat;
    And others, when the bagpipe sings i' th' nose,
    Cannot contain their urine; for affection,
    Mistress of passion, sways it to the mood
    Of what it likes or loathes. Now, for your answer:
    As there is no firm reason to be rend'red
    Why he cannot abide a gaping pig;
    Why he, a harmless necessary cat;
    Why he, a woollen bagpipe, but of force
    Must yield to such inevitable shame
    As to offend, himself being offended;
    So can I give no reason, nor I will not,
    More than a lodg'd hate and a certain loathing
    I bear Antonio, that I follow thus
    A losing suit against him. Are you answered?
  BASSANIO. This is no answer, thou unfeeling man,
    To excuse the current of thy cruelty.
  SHYLOCK. I am not bound to please thee with my answers.
  BASSANIO. Do all men kill the things they do not love?
  SHYLOCK. Hates any man the thing he would not kill?
  BASSANIO. Every offence is not a hate at first.
  SHYLOCK. What, wouldst thou have a serpent sting thee twice?
  ANTONIO. I pray you, think you question with the Jew.
    You may as well go stand upon the beach
    And bid the main flood bate his usual height;
    You may as well use question with the wolf,
    Why he hath made the ewe bleat for the lamb;
    You may as well forbid the mountain pines
    To wag their high tops and to make no noise
    When they are fretten with the gusts of heaven;
    You may as well do anything most hard
    As seek to soften that- than which what's harder?-
    His jewish heart. Therefore, I do beseech you,
    Make no moe offers, use no farther means,
    But with all brief and plain conveniency
    Let me have judgment, and the Jew his will.
  BASSANIO. For thy three thousand ducats here is six.
  SHYLOCK. If every ducat in six thousand ducats
    Were in six parts, and every part a ducat,
    I would not draw them; I would have my bond.
  DUKE OF VENICE. How shalt thou hope for mercy, rend'ring none?
  SHYLOCK. What judgment shall I dread, doing no wrong?
    You have among you many a purchas'd slave,
    Which, fike your asses and your dogs and mules,
    You use in abject and in slavish parts,
    Because you bought them; shall I say to you
    'Let them be free, marry them to your heirs-
    Why sweat they under burdens?- let their beds
    Be made as soft as yours, and let their palates
    Be season'd with such viands'? You will answer
    'The slaves are ours.' So do I answer you:
    The pound of flesh which I demand of him
    Is dearly bought, 'tis mine, and I will have it.
    If you deny me, fie upon your law!
    There is no force in the decrees of Venice.
    I stand for judgment; answer; shall I have it?
  DUKE OF VENICE. Upon my power I may dismiss this court,
    Unless Bellario, a learned doctor,
    Whom I have sent for to determine this,
    Come here to-day.
  SALERIO. My lord, here stays without
    A messenger with letters from the doctor,
    New come from Padua.
  DUKE OF VENICE. Bring us the letters; call the messenger.
  BASSANIO. Good cheer, Antonio! What, man, courage yet!
    The Jew shall have my flesh, blood, bones, and all,
    Ere thou shalt lose for me one drop of blood.
  ANTONIO. I am a tainted wether of the flock,
    Meetest for death; the weakest kind of fruit
    Drops earliest to the ground, and so let me.
    You cannot better be employ'd, Bassanio,
    Than to live still, and write mine epitaph.

           Enter NERISSA dressed like a lawyer's clerk

  DUKE OF VENICE. Came you from Padua, from Bellario?
  NERISSA. From both, my lord. Bellario greets your Grace.
                                             [Presents a letter]
  BASSANIO. Why dost thou whet thy knife so earnestly?
  SHYLOCK. To cut the forfeiture from that bankrupt there.
  GRATIANO. Not on thy sole, but on thy soul, harsh Jew,
    Thou mak'st thy knife keen; but no metal can,
    No, not the hangman's axe, bear half the keenness
    Of thy sharp envy. Can no prayers pierce thee?
  SHYLOCK. No, none that thou hast wit enough to make.
  GRATIANO. O, be thou damn'd, inexecrable dog!
    And for thy life let justice be accus'd.
    Thou almost mak'st me waver in my faith,
    To hold opinion with Pythagoras
    That souls of animals infuse themselves
    Into the trunks of men. Thy currish spirit
    Govern'd a wolf who, hang'd for human slaughter,
    Even from the gallows did his fell soul fleet,
    And, whilst thou layest in thy unhallowed dam,
    Infus'd itself in thee; for thy desires
    Are wolfish, bloody, starv'd and ravenous.
  SHYLOCK. Till thou canst rail the seal from off my bond,
    Thou but offend'st thy lungs to speak so loud;
    Repair thy wit, good youth, or it will fall
    To cureless ruin. I stand here for law.
  DUKE OF VENICE. This letter from Bellario doth commend
    A young and learned doctor to our court.
    Where is he?
  NERISSA. He attendeth here hard by
    To know your answer, whether you'll admit him.
  DUKE OF VENICE. With all my heart. Some three or four of you
    Go give him courteous conduct to this place.
    Meantime, the court shall hear Bellario's letter.
  CLERK.  [Reads]  'Your Grace shall understand that at the receipt
    of your letter I am very sick; but in the instant that your
    messenger came, in loving visitation was with me a young doctor
    of Rome- his name is Balthazar. I acquainted him with the cause
    in controversy between the Jew and Antonio the merchant; we
    turn'd o'er many books together; he is furnished with my opinion
    which, bettered with his own learning-the greatness whereof I
    cannot enough commend- comes with him at my importunity to fill
    up your Grace's request in my stead. I beseech you let his lack
    of years be no impediment to let him lack a reverend estimation,
    for I never knew so young a body with so old a head. I leave him
    to your gracious acceptance, whose trial shall better publish his
    commendation.'

      Enter PORTIA for BALTHAZAR, dressed like a Doctor of Laws

  DUKE OF VENICE. YOU hear the learn'd Bellario, what he writes;
    And here, I take it, is the doctor come.
    Give me your hand; come you from old Bellario?
  PORTIA. I did, my lord.
  DUKE OF VENICE. You are welcome; take your place.
    Are you acquainted with the difference
    That holds this present question in the court?
  PORTIA. I am informed throughly of the cause.
    Which is the merchant here, and which the Jew?
  DUKE OF VENICE. Antonio and old Shylock, both stand forth.
  PORTIA. Is your name Shylock?
  SHYLOCK. Shylock is my name.
  PORTIA. Of a strange nature is the suit you follow;
    Yet in such rule that the Venetian law
    Cannot impugn you as you do proceed.
    You stand within his danger, do you not?
  ANTONIO. Ay, so he says.
  PORTIA. Do you confess the bond?
  ANTONIO. I do.
  PORTIA. Then must the Jew be merciful.
  SHYLOCK. On what compulsion must I? Tell me that.
  PORTIA. The quality of mercy is not strain'd;
    It droppeth as the gentle rain from heaven
    Upon the place beneath. It is twice blest:
    It blesseth him that gives and him that takes.
    'Tis mightiest in the mightiest; it becomes
    The throned monarch better than his crown;
    His sceptre shows the force of temporal power,
    The attribute to awe and majesty,
    Wherein doth sit the dread and fear of kings;
    But mercy is above this sceptred sway,
    It is enthroned in the hearts of kings,
    It is an attribute to God himself;
    And earthly power doth then show likest God's
    When mercy seasons justice. Therefore, Jew,
    Though justice be thy plea, consider this-
    That in the course of justice none of us
    Should see salvation; we do pray for mercy,
    And that same prayer doth teach us all to render
    The deeds of mercy. I have spoke thus much
    To mitigate the justice of thy plea,
    Which if thou follow, this strict court of Venice
    Must needs give sentence 'gainst the merchant there.
  SHYLOCK. My deeds upon my head! I crave the law,
    The penalty and forfeit of my bond.
  BASSANIO. Yes; here I tender it for him in the court;
    Yea, twice the sum; if that will not suffice,
    I will be bound to pay it ten times o'er
    On forfeit of my hands, my head, my heart;
    If this will not suffice, it must appear
    That malice bears down truth. And, I beseech you,
    Wrest once the law to your authority;
    To do a great right do a little wrong,
    And curb this cruel devil of his will.
  PORTIA. It must not be; there is no power in Venice
    Can alter a decree established;
    'Twill be recorded for a precedent,
    And many an error, by the same example,
    Will rush into the state; it cannot be.
  SHYLOCK. A Daniel come to judgment! Yea, a Daniel!
    O wise young judge, how I do honour thee!
  PORTIA. I pray you, let me look upon the bond.
  SHYLOCK. Here 'tis, most reverend Doctor; here it is.
  PORTIA. Shylock, there's thrice thy money off'red thee.
  SHYLOCK. An oath, an oath! I have an oath in heaven.
    Shall I lay perjury upon my soul?
    No, not for Venice.
  PORTIA. Why, this bond is forfeit;
    And lawfully by this the Jew may claim
    A pound of flesh, to be by him cut off
    Nearest the merchant's heart. Be merciful.
    Take thrice thy money; bid me tear the bond.
  SHYLOCK. When it is paid according to the tenour.
    It doth appear you are a worthy judge;
    You know the law; your exposition
    Hath been most sound; I charge you by the law,
    Whereof you are a well-deserving pillar,
    Proceed to judgment. By my soul I swear
    There is no power in the tongue of man
    To alter me. I stay here on my bond.
  ANTONIO. Most heartily I do beseech the court
    To give the judgment.
  PORTIA. Why then, thus it is:
    You must prepare your bosom for his knife.
  SHYLOCK. O noble judge! O excellent young man!
  PORTIA. For the intent and purpose of the law
    Hath full relation to the penalty,
    Which here appeareth due upon the bond.
  SHYLOCK. 'Tis very true. O wise and upright judge,
    How much more elder art thou than thy looks!
  PORTIA. Therefore, lay bare your bosom.
  SHYLOCK. Ay, his breast-
    So says the bond; doth it not, noble judge?
    'Nearest his heart,' those are the very words.
  PORTIA. It is so. Are there balance here to weigh
    The flesh?
  SHYLOCK. I have them ready.
  PORTIA. Have by some surgeon, Shylock, on your charge,
    To stop his wounds, lest he do bleed to death.
  SHYLOCK. Is it so nominated in the bond?
  PORTIA. It is not so express'd, but what of that?
    'Twere good you do so much for charity.
  SHYLOCK. I cannot find it; 'tis not in the bond.
  PORTIA. You, merchant, have you anything to say?
  ANTONIO. But little: I am arm'd and well prepar'd.
    Give me your hand, Bassanio; fare you well.
    Grieve not that I am fall'n to this for you,
    For herein Fortune shows herself more kind
    Than is her custom. It is still her use
    To let the wretched man outlive his wealth,
    To view with hollow eye and wrinkled brow
    An age of poverty; from which ling'ring penance
    Of such misery doth she cut me off.
    Commend me to your honourable wife;
    Tell her the process of Antonio's end;
    Say how I lov'd you; speak me fair in death;
    And, when the tale is told, bid her be judge
    Whether Bassanio had not once a love.
    Repent but you that you shall lose your friend,
    And he repents not that he pays your debt;
    For if the Jew do cut but deep enough,
    I'll pay it instantly with all my heart.
  BASSANIO. Antonio, I am married to a wife
    Which is as dear to me as life itself;
    But life itself, my wife, and all the world,
    Are not with me esteem'd above thy life;
    I would lose all, ay, sacrifice them all
    Here to this devil, to deliver you.
  PORTIA. Your wife would give you little thanks for that,
    If she were by to hear you make the offer.
  GRATIANO. I have a wife who I protest I love;
    I would she were in heaven, so she could
    Entreat some power to change this currish Jew.
  NERISSA. 'Tis well you offer it behind her back;
    The wish would make else an unquiet house.
  SHYLOCK.  [Aside]  These be the Christian husbands! I have a
    daughter-
    Would any of the stock of Barrabas
    Had been her husband, rather than a Christian!-
    We trifle time; I pray thee pursue sentence.
  PORTIA. A pound of that same merchant's flesh is thine.
    The court awards it and the law doth give it.
  SHYLOCK. Most rightful judge!
  PORTIA. And you must cut this flesh from off his breast.
    The law allows it and the court awards it.
  SHYLOCK. Most learned judge! A sentence! Come, prepare.
  PORTIA. Tarry a little; there is something else.
    This bond doth give thee here no jot of blood:
    The words expressly are 'a pound of flesh.'
    Take then thy bond, take thou thy pound of flesh;
    But, in the cutting it, if thou dost shed
    One drop of Christian blood, thy lands and goods
    Are, by the laws of Venice, confiscate
    Unto the state of Venice.
  GRATIANO. O upright judge! Mark, Jew. O learned judge!
  SHYLOCK. Is that the law?
  PORTIA. Thyself shalt see the act;
    For, as thou urgest justice, be assur'd
    Thou shalt have justice, more than thou desir'st.
  GRATIANO. O learned judge! Mark, Jew. A learned judge!
  SHYLOCK. I take this offer then: pay the bond thrice,
    And let the Christian go.
  BASSANIO. Here is the money.
  PORTIA. Soft!
    The Jew shall have all justice. Soft! No haste.
    He shall have nothing but the penalty.
  GRATIANO. O Jew! an upright judge, a learned judge!
  PORTIA. Therefore, prepare thee to cut off the flesh.
    Shed thou no blood, nor cut thou less nor more
    But just a pound of flesh; if thou tak'st more
    Or less than a just pound- be it but so much
    As makes it light or heavy in the substance,
    Or the division of the twentieth part
    Of one poor scruple; nay, if the scale do turn
    But in the estimation of a hair-
    Thou diest, and all thy goods are confiscate.
  GRATIANO. A second Daniel, a Daniel, Jew!
    Now, infidel, I have you on the hip.
  PORTIA. Why doth the Jew pause? Take thy forfeiture.
  SHYLOCK. Give me my principal, and let me go.
  BASSANIO. I have it ready for thee; here it is.
  PORTIA. He hath refus'd it in the open court;
    He shall have merely justice, and his bond.
  GRATIANO. A Daniel still say I, a second Daniel!
    I thank thee, Jew, for teaching me that word.
  SHYLOCK. Shall I not have barely my principal?
  PORTIA. Thou shalt have nothing but the forfeiture
    To be so taken at thy peril, Jew.
  SHYLOCK. Why, then the devil give him good of it!
    I'll stay no longer question.
  PORTIA. Tarry, Jew.
    The law hath yet another hold on you.
    It is enacted in the laws of Venice,
    If it be proved against an alien
    That by direct or indirect attempts
    He seek the life of any citizen,
    The party 'gainst the which he doth contrive
    Shall seize one half his goods; the other half
    Comes to the privy coffer of the state;
    And the offender's life lies in the mercy
    Of the Duke only, 'gainst all other voice.
    In which predicament, I say, thou stand'st;
    For it appears by manifest proceeding
    That indirectly, and directly too,
    Thou hast contrived against the very life
    Of the defendant; and thou hast incurr'd
    The danger formerly by me rehears'd.
    Down, therefore, and beg mercy of the Duke.
  GRATIANO. Beg that thou mayst have leave to hang thyself;
    And yet, thy wealth being forfeit to the state,
    Thou hast not left the value of a cord;
    Therefore thou must be hang'd at the state's charge.
  DUKE OF VENICE. That thou shalt see the difference of our spirit,
    I pardon thee thy life before thou ask it.
    For half thy wealth, it is Antonio's;
    The other half comes to the general state,
    Which humbleness may drive unto a fine.
  PORTIA. Ay, for the state; not for Antonio.
  SHYLOCK. Nay, take my life and all, pardon not that.
    You take my house when you do take the prop
    That doth sustain my house; you take my life
    When you do take the means whereby I live.
  PORTIA. What mercy can you render him, Antonio?
  GRATIANO. A halter gratis; nothing else, for God's sake!
  ANTONIO. So please my lord the Duke and all the court
    To quit the fine for one half of his goods;
    I am content, so he will let me have
    The other half in use, to render it
    Upon his death unto the gentleman
    That lately stole his daughter-
    Two things provided more; that, for this favour,
    He presently become a Christian;
    The other, that he do record a gift,
    Here in the court, of all he dies possess'd
    Unto his son Lorenzo and his daughter.
  DUKE OF VENICE. He shall do this, or else I do recant
    The pardon that I late pronounced here.
  PORTIA. Art thou contented, Jew? What dost thou say?
  SHYLOCK. I am content.
  PORTIA. Clerk, draw a deed of gift.
  SHYLOCK. I pray you, give me leave to go from hence;
    I am not well; send the deed after me
    And I will sign it.
  DUKE OF VENICE. Get thee gone, but do it.
  GRATIANO. In christ'ning shalt thou have two god-fathers;
    Had I been judge, thou shouldst have had ten more,
    To bring thee to the gallows, not to the font.
                                                    Exit SHYLOCK
  DUKE OF VENICE. Sir, I entreat you home with me to dinner.
  PORTIA. I humbly do desire your Grace of pardon;
    I must away this night toward Padua,
    And it is meet I presently set forth.
  DUKE OF VENICE. I am sorry that your leisure serves you not.
    Antonio, gratify this gentleman,
    For in my mind you are much bound to him.
                             Exeunt DUKE, MAGNIFICOES, and train
  BASSANIO. Most worthy gentleman, I and my friend
    Have by your wisdom been this day acquitted
    Of grievous penalties; in lieu whereof
    Three thousand ducats, due unto the Jew,
    We freely cope your courteous pains withal.
  ANTONIO. And stand indebted, over and above,
    In love and service to you evermore.
  PORTIA. He is well paid that is well satisfied,
    And I, delivering you, am satisfied,
    And therein do account myself well paid.
    My mind was never yet more mercenary.
    I pray you, know me when we meet again;
    I wish you well, and so I take my leave.
  BASSANIO. Dear sir, of force I must attempt you further;
    Take some remembrance of us, as a tribute,
    Not as fee. Grant me two things, I pray you,
    Not to deny me, and to pardon me.
  PORTIA. You press me far, and therefore I will yield.
    [To ANTONIO]  Give me your gloves, I'll wear them for your sake.
    [To BASSANIO]  And, for your love, I'll take this ring from you.
    Do not draw back your hand; I'll take no more,
    And you in love shall not deny me this.
  BASSANIO. This ring, good sir- alas, it is a trifle;
    I will not shame myself to give you this.
  PORTIA. I will have nothing else but only this;
    And now, methinks, I have a mind to it.
  BASSANIO.. There's more depends on this than on the value.
    The dearest ring in Venice will I give you,
    And find it out by proclamation;
    Only for this, I pray you, pardon me.
  PORTIA. I see, sir, you are liberal in offers;
    You taught me first to beg, and now, methinks,
    You teach me how a beggar should be answer'd.
  BASSANIO. Good sir, this ring was given me by my wife;
    And, when she put it on, she made me vow
    That I should neither sell, nor give, nor lose it.
  PORTIA. That 'scuse serves many men to save their gifts.
    And if your wife be not a mad woman,
    And know how well I have deserv'd this ring,
    She would not hold out enemy for ever
    For giving it to me. Well, peace be with you!
                                       Exeunt PORTIA and NERISSA
  ANTONIO. My Lord Bassanio, let him have the ring.
    Let his deservings, and my love withal,
    Be valued 'gainst your wife's commandment.
  BASSANIO. Go, Gratiano, run and overtake him;
    Give him the ring, and bring him, if thou canst,
    Unto Antonio's house. Away, make haste.        Exit GRATIANO
    Come, you and I will thither presently;
    And in the morning early will we both
    Fly toward Belmont. Come, Antonio.                    Exeunt




SCENE II.
Venice. A street

Enter PORTIA and NERISSA

  PORTIA. Inquire the Jew's house out, give him this deed,
    And let him sign it; we'll away tonight,
    And be a day before our husbands home.
    This deed will be well welcome to Lorenzo.

                          Enter GRATIANO

  GRATIANO. Fair sir, you are well o'erta'en.
    My Lord Bassanio, upon more advice,
    Hath sent you here this ring, and doth entreat
    Your company at dinner.
  PORTIA. That cannot be.
    His ring I do accept most thankfully,
    And so, I pray you, tell him. Furthermore,
    I pray you show my youth old Shylock's house.
  GRATIANO. That will I do.
  NERISSA. Sir, I would speak with you.
    [Aside to PORTIA]  I'll See if I can get my husband's ring,
    Which I did make him swear to keep for ever.
  PORTIA.  [To NERISSA]  Thou Mayst, I warrant. We shall have old
      swearing
    That they did give the rings away to men;
    But we'll outface them, and outswear them too.
    [Aloud]  Away, make haste, thou know'st where I will tarry.
  NERISSA. Come, good sir, will you show me to this house?
                                                          Exeunt




ACT V. SCENE I.
Belmont. The garden before PORTIA'S house

Enter LORENZO and JESSICA

  LORENZO. The moon shines bright. In such a night as this,
    When the sweet wind did gently kiss the trees,
    And they did make no noise- in such a night,
    Troilus methinks mounted the Troyan walls,
    And sigh'd his soul toward the Grecian tents,
    Where Cressid lay that night.
  JESSICA. In such a night
    Did Thisby fearfully o'ertrip the dew,
    And saw the lion's shadow ere himself,
    And ran dismayed away.
  LORENZO. In such a night
    Stood Dido with a willow in her hand
    Upon the wild sea-banks, and waft her love
    To come again to Carthage.
  JESSICA. In such a night
    Medea gathered the enchanted herbs
    That did renew old AEson.
 LORENZO. In such a night
    Did Jessica steal from the wealthy Jew,
    And with an unthrift love did run from Venice
    As far as Belmont.
  JESSICA. In such a night
    Did young Lorenzo swear he lov'd her well,
    Stealing her soul with many vows of faith,
    And ne'er a true one.
  LORENZO. In such a night
    Did pretty Jessica, like a little shrew,
    Slander her love, and he forgave it her.
  JESSICA. I would out-night you, did no body come;
    But, hark, I hear the footing of a man.

                       Enter STEPHANO

  LORENZO. Who comes so fast in silence of the night?
  STEPHANO. A friend.
  LORENZO. A friend! What friend? Your name, I pray you, friend?
  STEPHANO. Stephano is my name, and I bring word
    My mistress will before the break of day
    Be here at Belmont; she doth stray about
    By holy crosses, where she kneels and prays
    For happy wedlock hours.
  LORENZO. Who comes with her?
  STEPHANO. None but a holy hermit and her maid.
    I pray you, is my master yet return'd?
  LORENZO. He is not, nor we have not heard from him.
    But go we in, I pray thee, Jessica,
    And ceremoniously let us prepare
    Some welcome for the mistress of the house.

                         Enter LAUNCELOT

  LAUNCELOT. Sola, sola! wo ha, ho! sola, sola!
  LORENZO. Who calls?
  LAUNCELOT. Sola! Did you see Master Lorenzo? Master Lorenzo! Sola,
    sola!
  LORENZO. Leave holloaing, man. Here!
  LAUNCELOT. Sola! Where, where?
  LORENZO. Here!
  LAUNCELOT. Tell him there's a post come from my master with his
    horn full of good news; my master will be here ere morning.
 Exit
  LORENZO. Sweet soul, let's in, and there expect their coming.
    And yet no matter- why should we go in?
    My friend Stephano, signify, I pray you,
    Within the house, your mistress is at hand;
    And bring your music forth into the air.       Exit STEPHANO
    How sweet the moonlight sleeps upon this bank!
    Here will we sit and let the sounds of music
    Creep in our ears; soft stillness and the night
    Become the touches of sweet harmony.
    Sit, Jessica. Look how the floor of heaven
    Is thick inlaid with patines of bright gold;
    There's not the smallest orb which thou behold'st
    But in his motion like an angel sings,
    Still quiring to the young-ey'd cherubins;
    Such harmony is in immortal souls,
    But whilst this muddy vesture of decay
    Doth grossly close it in, we cannot hear it.

                          Enter MUSICIANS

    Come, ho, and wake Diana with a hymn;
    With sweetest touches pierce your mistress' ear.
    And draw her home with music.                        [Music]
  JESSICA. I am never merry when I hear sweet music.
  LORENZO. The reason is your spirits are attentive;
    For do but note a wild and wanton herd,
    Or race of youthful and unhandled colts,
    Fetching mad bounds, bellowing and neighing loud,
    Which is the hot condition of their blood-
    If they but hear perchance a trumpet sound,
    Or any air of music touch their ears,
    You shall perceive them make a mutual stand,
    Their savage eyes turn'd to a modest gaze
    By the sweet power of music. Therefore the poet
    Did feign that Orpheus drew trees, stones, and floods;
    Since nought so stockish, hard, and full of rage,
    But music for the time doth change his nature.
    The man that hath no music in himself,
    Nor is not mov'd with concord of sweet sounds,
    Is fit for treasons, stratagems, and spoils;
    The motions of his spirit are dull:as night,
    And his affections dark as Erebus.
    Let no such man be trusted. Mark the music.

                    Enter PORTIA and NERISSA

  PORTIA. That light we see is burning in my hall.
    How far that little candle throws his beams!
    So shines a good deed in a naughty world.
  NERISSA. When the moon shone, we did not see the candle.
  PORTIA. So doth the greater glory dim the less:
    A substitute shines brightly as a king
    Until a king be by, and then his state
    Empties itself, as doth an inland brook
    Into the main of waters. Music! hark!
  NERISSA. It is your music, madam, of the house.
  PORTIA. Nothing is good, I see, without respect;
    Methinks it sounds much sweeter than by day.
  NERISSA. Silence bestows that virtue on it, madam.
  PORTIA. The crow doth sing as sweetly as the lark
    When neither is attended; and I think
    ne nightingale, if she should sing by day,
    When every goose is cackling, would be thought
    No better a musician than the wren.
    How many things by season season'd are
    To their right praise and true perfection!
    Peace, ho! The moon sleeps with Endymion,
    And would not be awak'd.                      [Music ceases]
  LORENZO. That is the voice,
    Or I am much deceiv'd, of Portia.
  PORTIA. He knows me as the blind man knows the cuckoo,
    By the bad voice.
  LORENZO. Dear lady, welcome home.
  PORTIA. We have been praying for our husbands' welfare,
    Which speed, we hope, the better for our words.
    Are they return'd?
  LORENZO. Madam, they are not yet;
    But there is come a messenger before,
    To signify their coming.
  PORTIA.. Go in, Nerissa;
    Give order to my servants that they take
    No note at all of our being absent hence;
    Nor you, Lorenzo; Jessica, nor you.        [A tucket sounds]
  LORENZO. Your husband is at hand; I hear his trumpet.
    We are no tell-tales, madam, fear you not.
  PORTIA. This night methinks is but the daylight sick;
    It looks a little paler; 'tis a day
    Such as the day is when the sun is hid.

       Enter BASSANIO, ANTONIO, GRATIANO, and their followers

  BASSANIO. We should hold day with the Antipodes,
    If you would walk in absence of the sun.
  PORTIA. Let me give light, but let me not be light,
    For a light wife doth make a heavy husband,
    And never be Bassanio so for me;
    But God sort all! You are welcome home, my lord.
  BASSANIO. I thank you, madam; give welcome to my friend.
    This is the man, this is Antonio,
    To whom I am so infinitely bound.
  PORTIA. You should in all sense be much bound to him,
    For, as I hear, he was much bound for you.
  ANTONIO. No more than I am well acquitted of.
  PORTIA. Sir, you are very welcome to our house.
    It must appear in other ways than words,
    Therefore I scant this breathing courtesy.
  GRATIANO.  [To NERISSA]  By yonder moon I swear you do me wrong;
    In faith, I gave it to the judge's clerk.
    Would he were gelt that had it, for my part,
    Since you do take it, love, so much at heart.
  PORTIA. A quarrel, ho, already! What's the matter?
  GRATIANO. About a hoop of gold, a paltry ring
    That she did give me, whose posy was
    For all the world like cutler's poetry
    Upon a knife, 'Love me, and leave me not.'
  NERISSA. What talk you of the posy or the value?
    You swore to me, when I did give it you,
    That you would wear it till your hour of death,
    And that it should lie with you in your grave;
    Though not for me, yet for your vehement oaths,
    You should have been respective and have kept it.
    Gave it a judge's clerk! No, God's my judge,
    The clerk will ne'er wear hair on's face that had it.
  GRATIANO. He will, an if he live to be a man.
  NERISSA. Ay, if a woman live to be a man.
  GRATIANO. Now by this hand I gave it to a youth,
    A kind of boy, a little scrubbed boy
    No higher than thyself, the judge's clerk;
    A prating boy that begg'd it as a fee;
    I could not for my heart deny it him.
  PORTIA. You were to blame, I must be plain with you,
    To part so slightly with your wife's first gift,
    A thing stuck on with oaths upon your finger
    And so riveted with faith unto your flesh.
    I gave my love a ring, and made him swear
    Never to part with it, and here he stands;
    I dare be sworn for him he would not leave it
    Nor pluck it from his finger for the wealth
    That the world masters. Now, in faith, Gratiano,
    You give your wife too unkind a cause of grief;
    An 'twere to me, I should be mad at it.
  BASSANIO.  [Aside]  Why, I were best to cut my left hand off,
    And swear I lost the ring defending it.
  GRATIANO. My Lord Bassanio gave his ring away
    Unto the judge that begg'd it, and indeed
    Deserv'd it too; and then the boy, his clerk,
    That took some pains in writing, he begg'd mine;
    And neither man nor master would take aught
    But the two rings.
  PORTIA. What ring gave you, my lord?
    Not that, I hope, which you receiv'd of me.
  BASSANIO. If I could add a lie unto a fault,
    I would deny it; but you see my finger
    Hath not the ring upon it; it is gone.
  PORTIA. Even so void is your false heart of truth;
    By heaven, I will ne'er come in your bed
    Until I see the ring.
  NERISSA. Nor I in yours
    Till I again see mine.
  BASSANIO. Sweet Portia,
    If you did know to whom I gave the ring,
    If you did know for whom I gave the ring,
    And would conceive for what I gave the ring,
    And how unwillingly I left the ring,
    When nought would be accepted but the ring,
    You would abate the strength of your displeasure.
  PORTIA. If you had known the virtue of the ring,
    Or half her worthiness that gave the ring,
    Or your own honour to contain the ring,
    You would not then have parted with the ring.
    What man is there so much unreasonable,
    If you had pleas'd to have defended it
    With any terms of zeal, wanted the modesty
    To urge the thing held as a ceremony?
    Nerissa teaches me what to believe:
    I'll die for't but some woman had the ring.
  BASSANIO. No, by my honour, madam, by my soul,
    No woman had it, but a civil doctor,
    Which did refuse three thousand ducats of me,
    And begg'd the ring; the which I did deny him,
    And suffer'd him to go displeas'd away-
    Even he that had held up the very life
    Of my dear friend. What should I say, sweet lady?
    I was enforc'd to send it after him;
    I was beset with shame and courtesy;
    My honour would not let ingratitude
    So much besmear it. Pardon me, good lady;
    For by these blessed candles of the night,
    Had you been there, I think you would have begg'd
    The ring of me to give the worthy doctor.
  PORTIA. Let not that doctor e'er come near my house;
    Since he hath got the jewel that I loved,
    And that which you did swear to keep for me,
    I will become as liberal as you;
    I'll not deny him anything I have,
    No, not my body, nor my husband's bed.
    Know him I shall, I am well sure of it.
    Lie not a night from home; watch me like Argus;
    If you do not, if I be left alone,
    Now, by mine honour which is yet mine own,
    I'll have that doctor for mine bedfellow.
  NERISSA. And I his clerk; therefore be well advis'd
    How you do leave me to mine own protection.
  GRATIANO. Well, do you so, let not me take him then;
    For, if I do, I'll mar the young clerk's pen.
  ANTONIO. I am th' unhappy subject of these quarrels.
  PORTIA. Sir, grieve not you; you are welcome not withstanding.
  BASSANIO. Portia, forgive me this enforced wrong;
    And in the hearing of these many friends
    I swear to thee, even by thine own fair eyes,
    Wherein I see myself-
  PORTIA. Mark you but that!
    In both my eyes he doubly sees himself,
    In each eye one; swear by your double self,
    And there's an oath of credit.
  BASSANIO. Nay, but hear me.
    Pardon this fault, and by my soul I swear
    I never more will break an oath with thee.
  ANTONIO. I once did lend my body for his wealth,
    Which, but for him that had your husband's ring,
    Had quite miscarried; I dare be bound again,
    My soul upon the forfeit, that your lord
    Will never more break faith advisedly.
  PORTIA. Then you shall be his surety. Give him this,
    And bid him keep it better than the other.
  ANTONIO. Here, Lord Bassanio, swear to keep this ring.
  BASSANIO. By heaven, it is the same I gave the doctor!
  PORTIA. I had it of him. Pardon me, Bassanio,
    For, by this ring, the doctor lay with me.
  NERISSA. And pardon me, my gentle Gratiano,
    For that same scrubbed boy, the doctor's clerk,
    In lieu of this, last night did lie with me.
  GRATIANO. Why, this is like the mending of highways
    In summer, where the ways are fair enough.
    What, are we cuckolds ere we have deserv'd it?
  PORTIA. Speak not so grossly. You are all amaz'd.
    Here is a letter; read it at your leisure;
    It comes from Padua, from Bellario;
    There you shall find that Portia was the doctor,
    Nerissa there her clerk. Lorenzo here
    Shall witness I set forth as soon as you,
    And even but now return'd; I have not yet
    Enter'd my house. Antonio, you are welcome;
    And I have better news in store for you
    Than you expect. Unseal this letter soon;
    There you shall find three of your argosies
    Are richly come to harbour suddenly.
    You shall not know by what strange accident
    I chanced on this letter.
  ANTONIO. I am dumb.
  BASSANIO. Were you the doctor, and I knew you not?
  GRATIANO. Were you the clerk that is to make me cuckold?
  NERISSA. Ay, but the clerk that never means to do it,
    Unless he live until he be a man.
  BASSANIO. Sweet doctor, you shall be my bedfellow;
    When I am absent, then lie with my wife.
  ANTONIO. Sweet lady, you have given me life and living;
    For here I read for certain that my ships
    Are safely come to road.
  PORTIA. How now, Lorenzo!
    My clerk hath some good comforts too for you.
  NERISSA. Ay, and I'll give them him without a fee.
    There do I give to you and Jessica,
    From the rich Jew, a special deed of gift,
    After his death, of all he dies possess'd of.
  LORENZO. Fair ladies, you drop manna in the way
    Of starved people.
  PORTIA. It is almost morning,
    And yet I am sure you are not satisfied
    Of these events at full. Let us go in,
    And charge us there upon inter'gatories,
    And we will answer all things faithfully.
  GRATIANO. Let it be so. The first inter'gatory
    That my Nerissa shall be sworn on is,
    Whether till the next night she had rather stay,
    Or go to bed now, being two hours to day.
    But were the day come, I should wish it dark,
    Till I were couching with the doctor's clerk.
    Well, while I live, I'll fear no other thing
    So sore as keeping safe Nerissa's ring.               Exeunt

THE END



<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>





1601

THE MERRY WIVES OF WINDSOR

by William Shakespeare



Dramatis Personae

  SIR JOHN FALSTAFF
  FENTON, a young gentleman
  SHALLOW, a country justice
  SLENDER, cousin to Shallow

    Gentlemen of Windsor
  FORD
  PAGE
  WILLIAM PAGE, a boy, son to Page
  SIR HUGH EVANS, a Welsh parson
  DOCTOR CAIUS, a French physician
  HOST of the Garter Inn

    Followers of Falstaff
  BARDOLPH
  PISTOL
  NYM
  ROBIN, page to Falstaff
  SIMPLE, servant to Slender
  RUGBY, servant to Doctor Caius

  MISTRESS FORD
  MISTRESS PAGE
  MISTRESS ANNE PAGE, her daughter
  MISTRESS QUICKLY, servant to Doctor Caius
  SERVANTS to Page, Ford, etc.




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



SCENE:
Windsor, and the neighbourhood


The Merry Wives of Windsor



ACT I. SCENE 1.

Windsor. Before PAGE'S house

Enter JUSTICE SHALLOW, SLENDER, and SIR HUGH EVANS

  SHALLOW. Sir Hugh, persuade me not; I will make a Star
    Chamber matter of it; if he were twenty Sir John Falstaffs,
    he shall not abuse Robert Shallow, esquire.
  SLENDER. In the county of Gloucester, Justice of Peace, and
    Coram.
  SHALLOW. Ay, cousin Slender, and Custalorum.
  SLENDER. Ay, and Ratolorum too; and a gentleman born,
    Master Parson, who writes himself 'Armigero' in any bill,
    warrant, quittance, or obligation-'Armigero.'
  SHALLOW. Ay, that I do; and have done any time these three
    hundred years.
  SLENDER. All his successors, gone before him, hath done't;
    and all his ancestors, that come after him, may: they may
    give the dozen white luces in their coat.
  SHALLOW. It is an old coat.
  EVANS. The dozen white louses do become an old coat well;
    it agrees well, passant; it is a familiar beast to man, and
    signifies love.
  SHALLOW. The luce is the fresh fish; the salt fish is an old
    coat.
  SLENDER. I may quarter, coz.
  SHALLOW. You may, by marrying.
  EVANS. It is marring indeed, if he quarter it.
  SHALLOW. Not a whit.
  EVANS. Yes, py'r lady! If he has a quarter of your coat, there
    is but three skirts for yourself, in my simple conjectures;
    but that is all one. If Sir John Falstaff have committed
    disparagements unto you, I am of the church, and will be
    glad to do my benevolence, to make atonements and
    compremises between you.
  SHALLOW. The Council shall hear it; it is a riot.
  EVANS. It is not meet the Council hear a riot; there is no
    fear of Got in a riot; the Council, look you, shall desire
    to hear the fear of Got, and not to hear a riot; take your
    vizaments in that.
  SHALLOW. Ha! o' my life, if I were young again, the sword
    should end it.
  EVANS. It is petter that friends is the sword and end it;
    and there is also another device in my prain, which
    peradventure prings goot discretions with it. There is Anne
    Page, which is daughter to Master George Page, which is
    pretty virginity.
  SLENDER. Mistress Anne Page? She has brown hair, and
    speaks small like a woman.
  EVANS. It is that fery person for all the orld, as just as you
    will desire; and seven hundred pounds of moneys, and
    gold, and silver, is her grandsire upon his death's-bed-Got
    deliver to a joyful resurrections!-give, when she is able to
    overtake seventeen years old. It were a goot motion if we
    leave our pribbles and prabbles, and desire a marriage
    between Master Abraham and Mistress Anne Page.
  SHALLOW. Did her grandsire leave her seven hundred pound?
  EVANS. Ay, and her father is make her a petter penny.
  SHALLOW. I know the young gentlewoman; she has good
    gifts.
  EVANS. Seven hundred pounds, and possibilities, is goot gifts.
  SHALLOW. Well, let us see honest Master Page. Is Falstaff
    there?
  EVANS. Shall I tell you a lie? I do despise a liar as I do
    despise one that is false; or as I despise one that is not
    true. The knight Sir John is there; and, I beseech you, be
    ruled by your well-willers. I will peat the door for Master
    Page.
    [Knocks]  What, hoa! Got pless your house here!
  PAGE.  [Within]  Who's there?

                            Enter PAGE

  EVANS. Here is Got's plessing, and your friend, and Justice
  Shallow; and here young Master Slender, that peradventures
    shall tell you another tale, if matters grow to your
    likings.
  PAGE. I am glad to see your worships well. I thank you for
    my venison, Master Shallow.
  SHALLOW. Master Page, I am glad to see you; much good do
    it your good heart! I wish'd your venison better; it was ill
    kill'd. How doth good Mistress Page?-and I thank you
    always with my heart, la! with my heart.
  PAGE. Sir, I thank you.
  SHALLOW. Sir, I thank you; by yea and no, I do.
  PAGE. I am glad to see you, good Master Slender.
  SLENDER. How does your fallow greyhound, sir? I heard say
    he was outrun on Cotsall.
  PAGE. It could not be judg'd, sir.
  SLENDER. You'll not confess, you'll not confess.
  SHALLOW. That he will not. 'Tis your fault; 'tis your fault;
    'tis a good dog.
  PAGE. A cur, sir.
  SHALLOW. Sir, he's a good dog, and a fair dog. Can there be
    more said? He is good, and fair. Is Sir John Falstaff here?
  PAGE. Sir, he is within; and I would I could do a good office
    between you.
  EVANS. It is spoke as a Christians ought to speak.
  SHALLOW. He hath wrong'd me, Master Page.
  PAGE. Sir, he doth in some sort confess it.
  SHALLOW. If it be confessed, it is not redressed; is not that
    so, Master Page? He hath wrong'd me; indeed he hath; at a
    word, he hath, believe me; Robert Shallow, esquire, saith
    he is wronged.
  PAGE. Here comes Sir John.

      Enter SIR JOHN FALSTAFF, BARDOLPH, NYM, and PISTOL

  FALSTAFF. Now, Master Shallow, you'll complain of me to
    the King?
  SHALLOW. Knight, you have beaten my men, kill'd my deer,
    and broke open my lodge.
  FALSTAFF. But not kiss'd your keeper's daughter.
  SHALLOW. Tut, a pin! this shall be answer'd.
  FALSTAFF. I will answer it straight: I have done all this.
    That is now answer'd.
  SHALLOW. The Council shall know this.
  FALSTAFF. 'Twere better for you if it were known in counsel:
    you'll be laugh'd at.
  EVANS. Pauca verba, Sir John; goot worts.
  FALSTAFF. Good worts! good cabbage! Slender, I broke your
    head; what matter have you against me?
  SLENDER. Marry, sir, I have matter in my head against you;
    and against your cony-catching rascals, Bardolph, Nym,
    and Pistol. They carried me to the tavern, and made me
    drunk, and afterwards pick'd my pocket.
  BARDOLPH. You Banbury cheese!
  SLENDER. Ay, it is no matter.
  PISTOL. How now, Mephostophilus!
  SLENDER. Ay, it is no matter.
  NYM. Slice, I say! pauca, pauca; slice! That's my humour.
  SLENDER. Where's Simple, my man? Can you tell, cousin?
  EVANS. Peace, I pray you. Now let us understand. There is
    three umpires in this matter, as I understand: that is,
    Master Page, fidelicet Master Page; and there is myself,
    fidelicet myself; and the three party is, lastly and
    finally, mine host of the Garter.
  PAGE. We three to hear it and end it between them.
  EVANS. Fery goot. I will make a prief of it in my note-book;
    and we will afterwards ork upon the cause with as great
    discreetly as we can.
  FALSTAFF. Pistol!
  PISTOL. He hears with ears.
  EVANS. The tevil and his tam! What phrase is this, 'He hears
    with ear'? Why, it is affectations.
  FALSTAFF. Pistol, did you pick Master Slender's purse?
  SLENDER. Ay, by these gloves, did he-or I would I might
    never come in mine own great chamber again else!-of
    seven groats in mill-sixpences, and two Edward
    shovel-boards that cost me two shilling and two pence apiece
    of Yead Miller, by these gloves.
  FALSTAFF. Is this true, Pistol?
  EVANS. No, it is false, if it is a pick-purse.
  PISTOL. Ha, thou mountain-foreigner! Sir John and master
    mine,
    I combat challenge of this latten bilbo.
    Word of denial in thy labras here!
    Word of denial! Froth and scum, thou liest.
  SLENDER. By these gloves, then, 'twas he.
  NYM. Be avis'd, sir, and pass good humours; I will say
    'marry trap' with you, if you run the nuthook's humour on
    me; that is the very note of it.
  SLENDER. By this hat, then, he in the red face had it; for
    though I cannot remember what I did when you made me
    drunk, yet I am not altogether an ass.
  FALSTAFF. What say you, Scarlet and John?
  BARDOLPH. Why, sir, for my part, I say the gentleman had
    drunk himself out of his five sentences.
  EVANS. It is his five senses; fie, what the ignorance is!
  BARDOLPH. And being fap, sir, was, as they say, cashier'd;
    and so conclusions pass'd the careers.
  SLENDER. Ay, you spake in Latin then too; but 'tis no matter;
    I'll ne'er be drunk whilst I live again, but in honest,
    civil, godly company, for this trick. If I be drunk, I'll be
    drunk with those that have the fear of God, and not with
    drunken knaves.
  EVANS. So Got udge me, that is a virtuous mind.
  FALSTAFF. You hear all these matters deni'd, gentlemen; you
    hear it.

          Enter MISTRESS ANNE PAGE with wine; MISTRESS
               FORD and MISTRESS PAGE, following

  PAGE. Nay, daughter, carry the wine in; we'll drink within.
                                                  Exit ANNE PAGE
  SLENDER. O heaven! this is Mistress Anne Page.
  PAGE. How now, Mistress Ford!
  FALSTAFF. Mistress Ford, by my troth, you are very well
    met; by your leave, good mistress.              [Kisses her]
  PAGE. Wife, bid these gentlemen welcome. Come, we have a
    hot venison pasty to dinner; come, gentlemen, I hope we
    shall drink down all unkindness.
                      Exeunt all but SHALLOW, SLENDER, and EVANS
  SLENDER. I had rather than forty shillings I had my Book of
    Songs and Sonnets here.

                          Enter SIMPLE

    How, Simple! Where have you been? I must wait on
    myself, must I? You have not the Book of Riddles about you,
    have you?
  SIMPLE. Book of Riddles! Why, did you not lend it to Alice
    Shortcake upon Allhallowmas last, a fortnight afore
    Michaelmas?
  SHALLOW. Come, coz; come, coz; we stay for you. A word
    with you, coz; marry, this, coz: there is, as 'twere, a
    tender, a kind of tender, made afar off by Sir Hugh here. Do
    you understand me?
  SLENDER. Ay, sir, you shall find me reasonable; if it be so, I
    shall do that that is reason.
  SHALLOW. Nay, but understand me.
  SLENDER. So I do, sir.
  EVANS. Give ear to his motions: Master Slender, I will
    description the matter to you, if you be capacity of it.
  SLENDER. Nay, I will do as my cousin Shallow says; I pray
    you pardon me; he's a justice of peace in his country,
    simple though I stand here.
  EVANS. But that is not the question. The question is
    concerning your marriage.
  SHALLOW. Ay, there's the point, sir.
  EVANS. Marry is it; the very point of it; to Mistress Anne
    Page.
  SLENDER. Why, if it be so, I will marry her upon any
    reasonable demands.
  EVANS. But can you affection the oman? Let us command to
    know that of your mouth or of your lips; for divers philosophers
    hold that the lips is parcel of the mouth. Therefore,
    precisely, can you carry your good will to the maid?
  SHALLOW. Cousin Abraham Slender, can you love her?
  SLENDER. I hope, sir, I will do as it shall become one that
    would do reason.
  EVANS. Nay, Got's lords and his ladies! you must speak possitable,
    if you can carry her your desires towards her.
  SHALLOW. That you must. Will you, upon good dowry,
    marry her?
  SLENDER. I will do a greater thing than that upon your request,
    cousin, in any reason.
  SHALLOW. Nay, conceive me, conceive me, sweet coz; what
    I do is to pleasure you, coz. Can you love the maid?
  SLENDER. I will marry her, sir, at your request; but if there
    be no great love in the beginning, yet heaven may decrease
    it upon better acquaintance, when we are married and
    have more occasion to know one another. I hope upon
    familiarity will grow more contempt. But if you say
    'marry her,' I will marry her; that I am freely dissolved,
    and dissolutely.
  EVANS. It is a fery discretion answer, save the fall is in the
    ord 'dissolutely': the ort is, according to our meaning,
    'resolutely'; his meaning is good.
  SHALLOW. Ay, I think my cousin meant well.
  SLENDER. Ay, or else I would I might be hang'd, la!

                       Re-enter ANNE PAGE

  SHALLOW. Here comes fair Mistress Anne. Would I were
    young for your sake, Mistress Anne!
  ANNE. The dinner is on the table; my father desires your
    worships' company.
  SHALLOW. I will wait on him, fair Mistress Anne!
  EVANS. Od's plessed will! I will not be absence at the grace.
                                        Exeunt SHALLOW and EVANS
  ANNE. Will't please your worship to come in, sir?
  SLENDER. No, I thank you, forsooth, heartily; I am very
    well.
  ANNE. The dinner attends you, sir.
  SLENDER. I am not a-hungry, I thank you, forsooth. Go,
    sirrah, for all you are my man, go wait upon my cousin
  Shallow.  [Exit SIMPLE]  A justice of peace sometime may
    be beholding to his friend for a man. I keep but three men
    and a boy yet, till my mother be dead. But what though?
    Yet I live like a poor gentleman born.
  ANNE. I may not go in without your worship; they will not
    sit till you come.
  SLENDER. I' faith, I'll eat nothing; I thank you as much as
    though I did.
  ANNE. I pray you, sir, walk in.
  SLENDER. I had rather walk here, I thank you. I bruis'd my
    shin th' other day with playing at sword and dagger with
    a master of fence-three veneys for a dish of stew'd prunes
    -and, I with my ward defending my head, he hot my shin,
    and, by my troth, I cannot abide the smell of hot meat
    since. Why do your dogs bark so? Be there bears i' th'
    town?
  ANNE. I think there are, sir; I heard them talk'd of.
  SLENDER. I love the sport well; but I shall as soon quarrel at
    it as any man in England. You are afraid, if you see the
    bear loose, are you not?
  ANNE. Ay, indeed, sir.
  SLENDER. That's meat and drink to me now. I have seen
    Sackerson loose twenty times, and have taken him by the
    chain; but I warrant you, the women have so cried and
    shriek'd at it that it pass'd; but women, indeed, cannot
    abide 'em; they are very ill-favour'd rough things.

                         Re-enter PAGE

  PAGE. Come, gentle Master Slender, come; we stay for you.
  SLENDER. I'll eat nothing, I thank you, sir.
  PAGE. By cock and pie, you shall not choose, sir! Come,
    come.
  SLENDER. Nay, pray you lead the way.
  PAGE. Come on, sir.
  SLENDER. Mistress Anne, yourself shall go first.
  ANNE. Not I, sir; pray you keep on.
  SLENDER. Truly, I will not go first; truly, la! I will not do
    you that wrong.
  ANNE. I pray you, sir.
  SLENDER. I'll rather be unmannerly than troublesome. You
    do yourself wrong indeed, la!                         Exeunt




SCENE 2.

Before PAGE'S house

Enter SIR HUGH EVANS and SIMPLE

  EVANS. Go your ways, and ask of Doctor Caius' house which
    is the way; and there dwells one Mistress Quickly, which
    is in the manner of his nurse, or his dry nurse, or his cook,
    or his laundry, his washer, and his wringer.
  SIMPLE. Well, sir.
  EVANS. Nay, it is petter yet. Give her this letter; for it is a
    oman that altogether's acquaintance with Mistress Anne
    Page; and the letter is to desire and require her to solicit
    your master's desires to Mistress Anne Page. I pray you
    be gone. I will make an end of my dinner; there's pippins
    and cheese to come.                                   Exeunt




SCENE 3.

The Garter Inn

Enter FALSTAFF, HOST, BARDOLPH, NYM, PISTOL, and ROBIN

  FALSTAFF. Mine host of the Garter!
  HOST. What says my bully rook? Speak scholarly and
    wisely.
  FALSTAFF. Truly, mine host, I must turn away some of my
    followers.
  HOST. Discard, bully Hercules; cashier; let them wag; trot,
    trot.
  FALSTAFF. I sit at ten pounds a week.
  HOST. Thou'rt an emperor-Caesar, Keiser, and Pheazar. I
    will entertain Bardolph; he shall draw, he shall tap; said I
    well, bully Hector?
  FALSTAFF. Do so, good mine host.
  HOST. I have spoke; let him follow.  [To BARDOLPH]  Let me
    see thee froth and lime. I am at a word; follow.   Exit HOST
  FALSTAFF. Bardolph, follow him. A tapster is a good trade;
    an old cloak makes a new jerkin; a wither'd serving-man a
    fresh tapster. Go; adieu.
  BARDOLPH. It is a life that I have desir'd; I will thrive.
  PISTOL. O base Hungarian wight! Wilt thou the spigot
    wield?                                         Exit BARDOLPH
  NYM. He was gotten in drink. Is not the humour conceited?
  FALSTAFF. I am glad I am so acquit of this tinder-box: his
    thefts were too open; his filching was like an unskilful
    singer-he kept not time.
  NYM. The good humour is to steal at a minute's rest.
  PISTOL. 'Convey' the wise it call. 'Steal' foh! A fico for the
    phrase!
  FALSTAFF. Well, sirs, I am almost out at heels.
  PISTOL. Why, then, let kibes ensue.
  FALSTAFF. There is no remedy; I must cony-catch; I must
    shift.
  PISTOL. Young ravens must have food.
  FALSTAFF. Which of you know Ford of this town?
  PISTOL. I ken the wight; he is of substance good.
  FALSTAFF. My honest lads, I will tell you what I am about.
  PISTOL. Two yards, and more.
  FALSTAFF. No quips now, Pistol. Indeed, I am in the waist
    two yards about; but I am now about no waste; I am about
    thrift. Briefly, I do mean to make love to Ford's wife; I
    spy entertainment in her; she discourses, she carves, she
    gives the leer of invitation; I can construe the action of her
    familiar style; and the hardest voice of her behaviour, to be
    English'd rightly, is 'I am Sir John Falstaff's.'
    PISTOL. He hath studied her well, and translated her will out
    of honesty into English.
  NYM. The anchor is deep; will that humour pass?
  FALSTAFF. Now, the report goes she has all the rule of her
    husband's purse; he hath a legion of angels.
  PISTOL. As many devils entertain; and 'To her, boy,' say I.
  NYM. The humour rises; it is good; humour me the angels.
  FALSTAFF. I have writ me here a letter to her; and here
    another to Page's wife, who even now gave me good eyes
    too, examin'd my parts with most judicious oeillades;
    sometimes the beam of her view gilded my foot, sometimes my
    portly belly.
  PISTOL. Then did the sun on dunghill shine.
  NYM. I thank thee for that humour.
  FALSTAFF. O, she did so course o'er my exteriors with such
    a greedy intention that the appetite of her eye did seem to
    scorch me up like a burning-glass! Here's another letter to
    her. She bears the purse too; she is a region in Guiana, all
    gold and bounty. I will be cheaters to them both, and they
    shall be exchequers to me; they shall be my East and West
    Indies, and I will trade to them both. Go, bear thou this
    letter to Mistress Page; and thou this to Mistress Ford. We
    will thrive, lads, we will thrive.
  PISTOL. Shall I Sir Pandarus of Troy become,
    And by my side wear steel? Then Lucifer take all!
  NYM. I will run no base humour. Here, take the
    humour-letter; I will keep the haviour of reputation.
  FALSTAFF.  [To ROBIN]  Hold, sirrah; bear you these letters
    tightly;
    Sail like my pinnace to these golden shores.
    Rogues, hence, avaunt! vanish like hailstones, go;
    Trudge, plod away i' th' hoof; seek shelter, pack!
    Falstaff will learn the humour of the age;
    French thrift, you rogues; myself, and skirted page.
                                       Exeunt FALSTAFF and ROBIN
  PISTOL. Let vultures gripe thy guts! for gourd and fullam
    holds,
    And high and low beguiles the rich and poor;
    Tester I'll have in pouch when thou shalt lack,
    Base Phrygian Turk!
  NYM. I have operations in my head which be humours of
    revenge.
  PISTOL. Wilt thou revenge?
  NYM. By welkin and her star!
  PISTOL. With wit or steel?
  NYM. With both the humours, I.
    I will discuss the humour of this love to Page.
  PISTOL. And I to Ford shall eke unfold
    How Falstaff, varlet vile,
    His dove will prove, his gold will hold,
    And his soft couch defile.
  NYM. My humour shall not cool; I will incense Page to deal
    with poison; I will possess him with yellowness; for the
    revolt of mine is dangerous. That is my true humour.
  PISTOL. Thou art the Mars of malcontents; I second thee;
    troop on.                                             Exeunt




SCENE 4.

DOCTOR CAIUS'S house

Enter MISTRESS QUICKLY, SIMPLE, and RUGBY

  QUICKLY. What, John Rugby! I pray thee go to the casement
    and see if you can see my master, Master Doctor
    Caius, coming. If he do, i' faith, and find anybody in the
    house, here will be an old abusing of God's patience and
    the King's English.
  RUGBY. I'll go watch.
  QUICKLY. Go; and we'll have a posset for't soon at night, in
    faith, at the latter end of a sea-coal fire.  [Exit RUGBY]  An
    honest, willing, kind fellow, as ever servant shall come in
    house withal; and, I warrant you, no tell-tale nor no
    breed-bate; his worst fault is that he is given to prayer; he is
    something peevish that way; but nobody but has his fault;
    but let that pass. Peter Simple you say your name is?
  SIMPLE. Ay, for fault of a better.
  QUICKLY. And Master Slender's your master?
  SIMPLE. Ay, forsooth.
  QUICKLY. Does he not wear a great round beard, like a
    glover's paring-knife?
  SIMPLE. No, forsooth; he hath but a little whey face, with a
    little yellow beard, a Cain-colour'd beard.
  QUICKLY. A softly-sprighted man, is he not?
  SIMPLE. Ay, forsooth; but he is as tall a man of his hands as
    any is between this and his head; he hath fought with a
    warrener.
  QUICKLY. How say you? O, I should remember him. Does
    he not hold up his head, as it were, and strut in his gait?
  SIMPLE. Yes, indeed, does he.
  QUICKLY. Well, heaven send Anne Page no worse fortune!
    Tell Master Parson Evans I will do what I can for your
    master. Anne is a good girl, and I wish-

                         Re-enter RUGBY

  RUGBY. Out, alas! here comes my master.
  QUICKLY. We shall all be shent. Run in here, good young
    man; go into this closet.  [Shuts SIMPLE in the closet]  He
    will not stay long. What, John Rugby! John! what, John,
    I say! Go, John, go inquire for my master; I doubt he be
    not well that he comes not home.  [Singing]
    And down, down, adown-a, etc.

                       Enter DOCTOR CAIUS

  CAIUS. Vat is you sing? I do not like des toys. Pray you, go
    and vetch me in my closet un boitier vert-a box, a green-a
    box. Do intend vat I speak? A green-a box.
  QUICKLY. Ay, forsooth, I'll fetch it you.  [Aside]  I am glad
    he went not in himself; if he had found the young man,
    he would have been horn-mad.
  CAIUS. Fe, fe, fe fe! ma foi, il fait fort chaud. Je m'en vais a
    la cour-la grande affaire.
  QUICKLY. Is it this, sir?
  CAIUS. Oui; mette le au mon pocket: depeche, quickly. Vere
    is dat knave, Rugby?
  QUICKLY. What, John Rugby? John!
  RUGBY. Here, sir.
  CAIUS. You are John Rugby, and you are Jack Rugby.
    Come, take-a your rapier, and come after my heel to the
    court.
  RUGBY. 'Tis ready, sir, here in the porch.
    CAIUS. By my trot, I tarry too long. Od's me! Qu'ai j'oublie?
    Dere is some simples in my closet dat I vill not for the
    varld I shall leave behind.
  QUICKLY. Ay me, he'll find the young man there, and be
    mad!
  CAIUS. O diable, diable! vat is in my closet? Villainy! larron!
    [Pulling SIMPLE out]  Rugby, my rapier!
  QUICKLY. Good master, be content.
  CAIUS. Wherefore shall I be content-a?
  QUICKLY. The young man is an honest man.
  CAIUS. What shall de honest man do in my closet? Dere is
    no honest man dat shall come in my closet.
  QUICKLY. I beseech you, be not so phlegmatic; hear the
    truth of it. He came of an errand to me from Parson Hugh.
  CAIUS. Vell?
  SIMPLE. Ay, forsooth, to desire her to-
  QUICKLY. Peace, I pray you.
  CAIUS. Peace-a your tongue. Speak-a your tale.
  SIMPLE. To desire this honest gentlewoman, your maid, to
    speak a good word to Mistress Anne Page for my master,
    in the way of marriage.
  QUICKLY. This is all, indeed, la! but I'll ne'er put my finger
    in the fire, and need not.
  CAIUS. Sir Hugh send-a you? Rugby, baillez me some paper.
    Tarry you a little-a-while.                        [Writes]
  QUICKLY.  [Aside to SIMPLE]  I am glad he is so quiet; if he
    had been throughly moved, you should have heard him
    so loud and so melancholy. But notwithstanding, man, I'll
    do you your master what good I can; and the very yea and
    the no is, the French doctor, my master-I may call him
    my master, look you, for I keep his house; and I wash,
    wring, brew, bake, scour, dress meat and drink, make the
    beds, and do all myself-
  SIMPLE.  [Aside to QUICKLY]  'Tis a great charge to come
    under one body's hand.
  QUICKLY.  [Aside to SIMPLE]  Are you avis'd o' that? You
    shall find it a great charge; and to be up early and down
    late; but notwithstanding-to tell you in your ear, I would
    have no words of it-my master himself is in love with
    Mistress Anne Page; but notwithstanding that, I know
    Anne's mind-that's neither here nor there.
  CAIUS. You jack'nape; give-a this letter to Sir Hugh; by gar,
    it is a shallenge; I will cut his troat in de park; and I will
    teach a scurvy jack-a-nape priest to meddle or make. You
    may be gone; it is not good you tarry here. By gar, I will
    cut all his two stones; by gar, he shall not have a stone
    to throw at his dog.                             Exit SIMPLE
  QUICKLY. Alas, he speaks but for his friend.
  CAIUS. It is no matter-a ver dat. Do not you tell-a me dat I
    shall have Anne Page for myself? By gar, I vill kill de Jack
    priest; and I have appointed mine host of de Jarteer to
    measure our weapon. By gar, I will myself have Anne
    Page.
  QUICKLY. Sir, the maid loves you, and all shall be well. We
    must give folks leave to prate. What the good-year!
  CAIUS. Rugby, come to the court with me. By gar, if I have
    not Anne Page, I shall turn your head out of my door.
    Follow my heels, Rugby.               Exeunt CAIUS and RUGBY
  QUICKLY. You shall have-An fool's-head of your own. No,
    I know Anne's mind for that; never a woman in Windsor
    knows more of Anne's mind than I do; nor can do more
    than I do with her, I thank heaven.
  FENTON.  [Within]  Who's within there? ho!
  QUICKLY. Who's there, I trow? Come near the house, I pray
    you.

                          Enter FENTON

  FENTON. How now, good woman, how dost thou?
  QUICKLY. The better that it pleases your good worship to
    ask.
  FENTON. What news? How does pretty Mistress Anne?
  QUICKLY. In truth, sir, and she is pretty, and honest, and
    gentle; and one that is your friend, I can tell you that by
    the way; I praise heaven for it.
  FENTON. Shall I do any good, think'st thou? Shall I not lose
    my suit?
  QUICKLY. Troth, sir, all is in His hands above; but
    notwithstanding, Master Fenton, I'll be sworn on a book
    she loves you. Have not your worship a wart above your eye?
  FENTON. Yes, marry, have I; what of that?
  QUICKLY. Well, thereby hangs a tale; good faith, it is such
    another Nan; but, I detest, an honest maid as ever broke
    bread. We had an hour's talk of that wart; I shall never
    laugh but in that maid's company! But, indeed, she is
    given too much to allicholy and musing; but for you-well,
    go to.
  FENTON. Well, I shall see her to-day. Hold, there's money
    for thee; let me have thy voice in my behalf. If thou seest
    her before me, commend me.
  QUICKLY. Will I? I' faith, that we will; and I will tell your
    worship more of the wart the next time we have confidence;
    and of other wooers.